# Recipe for Failure

Recipe	for	Failure
	
In	the	knowledge	of	the	Atman,
which	is	the	dark	night	to	the	ignorant,

=== Page 4 ===
the	recollected	mind	is	fully	awake	and	aware.
	
The	ignorant	are	awake	in	their	sense-life,
which	is	darkness	to	the	sage.
	
Bhagavad	Gita
	
	
Kamiel	came	prepared
.	 He	 carries	 a	 bulging,	 well-worn,	 triple	 rubber-banded
notebook	full	of	thoughts,	ideas,	and	questions	accumulated	during	several	years	of
reading	spiritual	books,	attending	spiritual	gatherings,	and	participating	in	spiritual
internet	discussion	groups.
	
“A	lot	of	teachers,”	he	informs	me,	“say	that	the	necessary	first	step	in	awakening	is
dissatisfaction;	a	gnawing	discontentment	on	the	feeling	level.	Is	that	what	you
mean	when	you	talk	about	intent?”
	
Most	of	Kamiel’s	reading	in	recent	years	has	centered	on	the	works	of	Ramana
Maharshi,	Nisargadatta	Maharaj,	Ramesh	Balsekar,	Jean	Klein	and	that	whole	crew.
He	seems	philosophically	inclined	toward	the	peculiar	brand	of	nonduality	and	neo-
Advaita	Vedanta	that	attracts	a	growing	audience	these	days.	Its	allure	seems	based
on	its	simple	core	truth;	not-two.	While	not-two	is	not	exactly	true,	two	is	exactly
not	true,	and	therefore	succinctly	marks	the	endpoint	of	dualistic	thought;	you’d
think.	Where	nondual	enthusiasts	go	astray	is	in	trying	to	erect	a	philosophical
structure	atop	this	simple	truth.	Truth	is	always	simple	and	never	provides	the	basis
for	any	philosophy,	but	Kamiel	is	determined	to	believe	that	his	ramshackle	nondual
philosophy	 is	 structurally	 sound.	 I’ve	 explained	 to	 him	 that	 you	 can’t	 build	 a
philosophy	of	This	on	a	foundation	of	Not-This,	but	he	is	quite	attached	to	his
improbable	little	edifice	and	not	yet	ready	to	decamp.
	
Which	is	perfectly	fine.	Waking	up	is	a	stop-and-go	journey.	It	takes	a	lot	of	hard
work	to	reach	a	plateau	like	nonduality	and	pausing	to	rest	and	acclimatize	before
moving	on	is	part	of	the	process.	Nonduality	may	not	be	the	final	destination	new
arrivals	might	suppose,	but	getting	there	is	an	impressive	and	challenging	feat	and
the	views	are	rewarding	in	all	directions.	What’s	more,	I	like	Kamiel	and	generally
enjoy	talking	with	him.	He	asks	good	questions	that	elicit	interesting	answers.	I’m
usually	limited	to	speaking	in	monologues	rather	than	dialogues,	but	it’s	the	student
who	calls	the	tune	and	Kamiel	makes	a	good	job	of	it.
	

=== Page 5 ===
“Well,”	I	respond	after	thinking	about	his	question	a	bit,	“I	guess	it’s	a	matter	of
degree.	Let’s	try	out	a	new	analogy.	I’m	making	this	up	on	the	fly	so	bear	with	me.
Here’s	the	situation:	You’re	sitting	in	your	skyscraper	office	a	hundred	stories	off
the	ground	thinking	about	how	successful	you	are	and	how	your	life	is	just	grand.
With	me	so	far?	In	terms	of	satisfaction,	you’re	very	satisfied.	You	have	it	all;	fancy
office,	great	views,	the	respect	and	admiration	of	those	around	you,	everything	you
ever	wanted.	Okay?”
	
“Okay.”
	
“So,	you’re	like	that—happy,	content,	well-satisfied—for	however	long;	months,
years,	decades.	But	then	one	day,	for	whatever	reason,	dissatisfaction	begins	to
creep	in.	Something	about	your	office	starts	to	bug	you.	It	starts	with	little	things.
You’re	dissatisfied	with	your	curtains;	they	don’t	go	with	the	credenza	at	all.	‘What
was	I	thinking?’	you	wonder.	‘How	could	I	have	been	so	blind?’	And	now	that
you’re	looking	more	closely,	it’s	obvious	that	the	carpet	is	a	fiasco	and	the	artwork
is	just	an	embarrassment.	One	minute	you’re	happy,	the	next	minute	you’re	very
dissatisfied.	Extremely	dissatisfied.	This	office	is	simply	not	an	accurate	outward
representation	of	your	inner	professional.	You’ve	outgrown	it.”
	
“It	actually	sounds	like	a	pretty	cool	office.”
	
“Yes,	well,	that’s	what	everyone	else	thinks;	your	friends,	colleagues,	your	family.
They	think	you’ve	got	it	made	and	that	you’re	nuts	for	wanting	to	mess	with	it.	Of
course,	you’re	only	dissatisfied	when	you’re	in	the	office.	You	pretty	much	forget
about	it	when	you’re	anywhere	else.	Right?”
	
“Right.”
	
“And	you’re	following	the	analogy,	right?	These	things	can	be	a	bit	wobbly	the	first
time	out.	Your	office	represents	your	relationship	to	the	larger	questions	of	life	and
your	dissatisfaction	represents—”
	
“Got	it.”
	
“Good.	So	what’s	the	answer?	What	do	you	do	about	this	very	dissatisfying	office
of	yours?”
	
“Uh,	I	don’t	know,”	he	shrugs.	“Redecorate?”
	

=== Page 6 ===
“Yeah,	that	sounds	right.	But	this	time	you’re	going	to	be	very	serious	about	it.
You’re	going	to	bring	in	a	top-notch	decorator	and	strip	the	place	down	to	the
floorboards	and	start	from	scratch.	You’re	not	going	to	be	a	mere	dabbler;	you’re
going	all	the	way	with	this.	You’re	a	serious	professional	and	you	deserve	a	serious
office.	See	what	I	mean?	See	how	what	started	as	a	gnawing	little	dissatisfaction
has	grown	into	a	life-transforming	event?”
	
“Okay,”	he	says	dutifully.
	
“So	that’s	what	you	do.	You	go	out	and	buy	books	and	magazines	on	interior
design.	 You	 talk	 to	 people	 and	 attend	 lectures	 and	 events.	 You	 hire	 the	 best
decorator	you	can	find;	someone	you	resonate	with	deeply.	You	yourself	are	being
transformed	by	this	experience.	You	yourself	are	growing,	developing,	expanding.
It’s	very	challenging,	but	you’re	taking	a	no-nonsense	approach.	It’s	slow	going,	but
little	by	little	change	is	occurring.	Your	office	is	starting	to	look	and	feel	like	a
genuine	outer	representation	of	your	inner	professional.	It	may	take	years	to	get	it
right,	but	nothing	will	stop	you.	This	is	too	important.	In	fact,	it	has	become	one	of
the	most	important	things	in	your	life,	right	up	there	with	home	and	family.	See
what	I	mean?”
	
“Yes,”	 he	 says	 eagerly.	 “The	 master	 decorator	 represents	 the	 guru	 and	 the
redecorating	process	represents	the	spiritual	transformation	we	undergo	when	we
truly	begin	to	challenge	our	beliefs	and	seek	higher	knowledge.	What	started	out	as
kind	of	a	gnawing	dissatisfaction	has	grown	into	the	impetus	for	important	change,
and	although	it	might	seem	like	a	bad	thing	at	first,	this	is	how	the	process	of
change	works.	This	is	how	we	develop,	how	we	grow.”
	
“Exactly,”	I	say.	“Nobody	acts	from	contentment.	We	need	problems	to	solve	or
else	we	vegetate.	That	great	office	was	once	something	we	strived	to	get,	then	it
was	achieved	and	enjoyed	in	contentment,	but	then	discontent	sets	in	to	let	us	know
that	it’s	time	to	move	on.”
	
“So,”	says	Kamiel,	“that’s	what	the	teachers	are	talking	about	when	they	discuss	the
dissatisfaction	needed	to	spur	us	on,	right?	It	might	seem	bad	or	uncomfortable,	but
it’s	really	a	good	thing?”
	
“Sounds	right,”	I	say.
	
“And	that’s	the	sort	of	determination	and	focus	that’s	required	in	order	to	awaken
from	delusion?	To	become	truth-realized?”	He	smiles,	excited,	like	he’s	just	now

=== Page 7 ===
getting	the	big	picture.	“So	that’s	what	you	mean	by	purity	of	intent!”
	
I	smile	back.
	
“Fuck	no.	That’s	what	I	mean	by	recipe	for	failure.”
	
His	dismay	is	instantly	apparent.	I’ve	cut	him	off	in	the	first	rush	of	a	new	grokking
and	now	he’s	confused	and	hurt.	I	did	this	intentionally.	I	didn’t	allow	myself	to	be
drawn	into	this	“A	lot	of	teachers	say—”	conversation	just	wanting	to	make	a	point;
I	wanted	counterpoint.	That’s	what	the	dialogue	has	been	up	until	now	because	I
wanted	to	make	a	clear	distinction.	This	is	the	critical	distinction	between	seekers
and	finders.	This	is	where	the	line	is	drawn;	a	line	the	existence	of	which	“a	lot	of
teachers”	don’t	even	suspect.
	
“That’s	the	sort	of	pathetic,	half-assed	approach	that	is	absolutely	certain	to	keep
you	confined	to	your	current	state.	That’s	the	sort	of	approach	that	everyone	takes,
and	that’s	why	they	fail.”
	
He	visibly	and	audibly	gulps.	“Oh.”
	
“The	very	people	and	institutions	that	are	supposedly	dedicated	to	waking	us	up	are
doing	exactly	the	opposite.	They	are	lulling	us	into	a	more	comfortable	sleep.	That’s
what	we	really	want	and	that’s	what	they	really	provide.”
	
He	doesn’t	seem	pleased.	“Oh,	God…	well	then…	then	what	drives	the	process	of
true	awakening?”
	
“Purity	of	intent,	but	what	does	that	really	mean?	Okay,	you’re	back	in	the	office
again,	totally	satisfied	with	everything.	Life	is	great.	Okay?”
	
“Yeah.”
	
“Okay.	 So	 now	 dissatisfaction	 starts	 to	 creep	 in	 on	 you,	 but	 this	 time	 the
dissatisfaction	stems	from	the	fact	that	you	smell	smoke.”
	
“The	building	is	on	fire	now?”
	
“Wake	up	and	smell	the	coffin,	Kamiel.	The	building	has	always	been	on	fire,	you
were	just	repressing	that	knowledge	until	now.	But	now	you’re	aware	of	it	and	it’s
causing	you	some	dissatisfaction.	Quite	a	lot,	in	fact,	and	more	with	every	passing

=== Page 8 ===
moment.	Now	for	the	first	time	you	realize	that	the	flames	are	right	outside	the	door
and	the	temperature	is	rising.	Acrid	black	smoke	is	pouring	in.	The	door	bursts	into
flames.	There	is	no	exit.	Now	you’re	very,	very	dissatisfied	with	your	office.	In	fact,
you’re	starting	to	hate	your	office	quite	profoundly.	See	how	this	dissatisfaction—
this	gnawing	discontentment	on	the,	uh,	feeling	level—is	of	a	more	immediate	and
compelling	nature	then	the	dissatisfaction	brought	on	by	the	decor?”
	
He	nods	mutely.
	
“Sure.	Now	your	dissatisfaction	with	your	office	is	quite	intense.	Searing,	really.	In
fact,	your	dissatisfaction	is	so	intense	that	it	feels	like	you’re	on	fire,	like	you	can’t
stand	to	be	in	your	own	skin,	like	anything	would	be	better	than	more	of	this.	Now
you	have	no	thought	at	all	for	career,	home,	or	family.	Due	to	a	change	in	your
personal	circumstances	they’ve	all	been	reduced	to	complete	irrelevance.	Beliefs
and	concepts	disappear	and	even	death	is	suddenly	small.	You’re	very	focused	now.
You’re	in	the	moment,	very	present.	The	flames	are	feet	away.	Your	dissatisfaction
with	your	office	is	well	beyond	anything	even	a	master	redecorator	could	handle	for
you,	agree?”
	
He	nods.
	
“And	there’s	no	return,	is	there?	No	going	back.	No	do-over.	The	fire	is	here.	It’s	a
fact.	Do	you	see	that?”
	
He	nods	again.
	
“And	you’re	completely	alone	in	all	this.	There’s	no	rescue.	Your	office	is	engulfed
in	flames	and	there’s	no	one	here	to	save	you.	Not	Jesus	or	Buddha	or	the	Pope	or
your	mama.	This	is	your	dissatisfaction.	This	is	your	problem.	This	is	your	agony.
This	is	you	about	to	burn	to	death,	okay?”
	
“Okay.”
	
“Okay.	So	what	do	you	do?”
	
“Huh?”
	
“Your	world	is	burning.	The	whole	office	is	in	flames.	You’re	in	a	hopeless,	no-
escape	situation.	The	pain	has	started	and	will	only	get	worse.	I	think	we	can	safely
say	that	your	dissatisfaction	is	now	quite	pronounced.	What	do	you	do?”

=== Page 9 ===
	
“Christ,	I	don’t	know.	Go	out	the	window?”
	
“Really?”
	
“Hell,	I	don’t	know.	What	else?”
	
“Yeah,	I	guess	so.	You’re	in	this	inferno	of	an	office	while	outside	the	window	is
blue	 sky,	 white	 clouds,	 and	 freedom	 from	 suffering.	 That	 seems	 like	 the	 only
possible	solution	given	your	very	dissatisfying	circumstances.	But—”
	
“But	what?”
	
“Well,	that’s	not	Hollywood	glass	in	those	skyscraper	windows.	You	start	flinging
yourself	against	the	window	but	it	doesn’t	give.	Your	dissatisfaction	is	of	such
intensity	that	you	might	break	bones	and	crack	your	skull	from	hurling	yourself
desperately	against	the	window,	all	to	no	avail.”
	
“Yeah,	then	what?	What	happens?”
	
“Well,	the	obvious	thing	is	that	you	might	simply	perish	in	the	hellish	inferno.	No
law	against	dying.”
	
He	looks	at	me	desperately.
	
“Or,	maybe	you	have	some	object	that	allows	you	to	break	the	window	out.	Or
maybe	the	sheer	intensity	of	your—what	are	we	calling	it,	dissatisfaction?—allows
you	 to	 break	 through	 the	 unbreakable	 window.	 So,	 boom!,	 you	 blow	 out	 the
window.	Now	there’s	nothing	left	in	the	equation	but	you,	the	raging	fire,	and	a
hundred	story	plummet	to	the	sidewalk	below.	Everything	is	suddenly	quite	simple.
Perhaps	for	the	first	time,	your	life	is	perfectly	clear.”
	
“Yeah?	Then?”
	
“Burn	or	jump,	I	guess.”
	
“Burn	or	jump?”
	
“Do	you	see	another	option?”
	

=== Page 10 ===
“Burn	or	jump,”	he	says	flatly.
	
“When	you	become	so	dissatisfied	with	your	office	that	the	hundred	story	plummet
and	the	sidewalk	seem	like	the	better	option,	so	dissatisfied	that	you	actually	hurl
yourself	out	the	window,	then	you	know	the	level	of	dissatisfaction	necessary	to
awaken	from	delusion.”
	
He	is	silent	for	several	moments,	head	bowed,	thoughtful.	“I	guess	dissatisfaction
isn’t	the	right	word.”
	
“Maybe	not,”	I	agree.	“I	call	it	purity	of	intent,	but	that	doesn’t	really	capture	it
either.”
	
“And	that’s	something	every	enlightened	master	went	through?”
	
“You	 say	 it	 like	 there	 are	 countless	 enlightened	 masters	 dotting	 the	 spiritual
landscape,	but	there	are	extremely	few,	and	now	you	know	why.”
	
“Jesus,”	he	mumbles,	seemingly	sincere	in	his	effort	to	truly	appreciate	what	he’s
just	been	told.	“Jesus.”
	
I	deliver	the	moral	of	the	story	in	three	easy	pieces.
	
“The	price.	Of	truth.	Is	everything.”
	
“Jesus,”	he	repeats.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
