# Interview with Jed McKenna

Interview	with	Jed	McKenna
	
The	truth	is	that	enlightenment	is	neither	remote	nor	unattainable.	It	is	closer	than
your	skin	and	more	immediate	than	your	next	breath.	If	we	wonder	why	so	few
seem	able	to	find	that	which	can	never	be	lost,	we	might	recall	the	child	who	was
looking	in	the	light	for	a	coin	he	dropped	in	the	dark	because	“the	light	is	better
over	here.”
	
Jed	McKenna

=== Page 11 ===
	
	
Q:
	What	is	enlightenment?
	
A:	No-self.
	
Q:
	Okay,	what	is	no-self?
	
Abiding	non-dual	awareness.
	
Q:
	Okay,	what	is—?
	
I	can’t	tell	you	what	it	is;	no	one	can.	It’s	not	a	thing,	it’s	not	a	concept,	it’s	not	a
place.	There’s	no	explaining	fire	to	someone	who’s	never	seen	fire;	no	description
can	do	justice	to	the	direct	experience	of	fire.	I	use	terms	like	abiding	non-dual
awareness	and	no-self	and	truth-realization	not	because	they	capture	it,	but	because
they	seem	the	least	misleading.
	
Q:
	Most	people	define	spiritual	enlightenment	very	differently	from	the	way	you
describe	it,	as	if	they	are	talking	about	an	unrelated	state.	How	can	there	be	such
disparity?
	
Enlightenment	is	absolute.	It	doesn’t	come	in	varieties	or	degrees.	It’s	not	open	to
interpretation.	 But	 the	 most	 important	 thing	 is	 that	 it’s	 self-verifiable	 and
completely	available	to	reason.	Anyone	who	wants	to	understand	can	understand.	It
doesn’t	require	interpreters	or	intermediaries.	It’s	just	sitting	there,	right	out	in	the
open,	for	anyone	who	cares	to	look.	No	one	has	to	rely	on	me	or	anyone	else.
Becoming	enlightened	may	be	a	real	ball-buster,	but	enlightenment	theory	is	a
breeze.	The	first	chapter	of	the	book	is	titled	“That	which	cannot	be	simpler.”	That’s
an	exact	statement.	Enlightenment	is	that	which	cannot	be	simplified	further;	cannot
be	further	reduced.
	
Q:
	Which	brings	us	to	the	question	of	who	is	enlightened?	Who	is	writing	the
book?	Who	is	teaching?	It’s	very	difficult	to	reconcile	the	appearance	of	self	with
the	claim	of	no-self.
	
And	yet,	there	it	is.	True	self	is	no-self	and	there’s	just	no	way	to	make	it	sound
reasonable.	I	can’t	express	it	in	a	way	that	anyone	is	going	to	get	it.	I’m	aware	that
there’s	an	apparent	contradiction,	but	it	doesn’t	appear	to	me.	It’s	like	the	gateless

=== Page 12 ===
gate	thing.	It	looks	one	way	from	there	and	another	from	here.	All	I	can	say	is	come
here	and	see	for	yourself.
	
Q:
	That	sounds	like	a	leap	of	faith,	not	logic.
	
It’s	simple	math.	Anyone	can	verify	for	themselves	the	truth	of	non-duality;	the	fact
that	all	is	one.	Any	reasonably	able-minded	person	can	put	it	together	on	their	own.
From	there,	it’s	a	short	step	to	no-self.	Once	you	have	established	in	your	own	mind
the	truth	of	nonduality,	then	countless	fictions,	like	the	idea	of	a	separate	self,	shall
not	long	endure.
	
Q:
	You	say	“reasonably	able-minded	person.”	What’s	really	required	by	way	of
intelligence	for	this	undertaking?
	
Not	much,	as	my	own	success	attests.	It	all	really	comes	back	to	intent.	If	the	intent
is	 in	 place,	 everything	 is	 in	 place.	 If	 the	 intent	 isn’t	 in	 place,	 no	 amount	 of
intelligence	will	make	any	difference.
	
Q:
	So	logic	is	the	tool	of	the	mind	and	desire	is	the	tool	of	the	heart?
	
Sure.	Good.	Logic—mind—is	the	sword	and	intent—heart—is	the	will	to	use	it.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	It’s	often	said	that	for	a	book	to	do	well	the	author	must	actively	promote	it
through	appearances	and	media	exposure.	Why	won’t	you	do	book	signings	or	radio
interviews	or	any	of	that?
	
I	could	answer	that	a	lot	of	different	ways.	I	could	say	that	the	nature	of	the	book
doesn’t	lend	itself	to	that	sort	of	exposure,	which	is	true.	I	could	say	that	I’m	not
disposed	to	undergo	that	sort	of	personal	exposure,	which	is	also	true.	But	the	larger
truth	is	that	the	book	will	succeed	or	fail	on	things	other	than	marketing	and	PR.	My
job	 was	 to	 competently	 write	 the	 book.	 The	 publisher’s	 job	 is	 to	 competently
produce	the	book	and	make	it	available.	How	the	book	fares	in	the	marketplace	is
none	of	our	concern.
	
Q:
	Do	you	care	if	it	succeeds	or	fails?
	
I’d	be	amused	if	it	succeeds.	I’d	be	relieved	if	it	fails.	I	had	an	urge	to	express
certain	things	and	now	I	have	and	the	urge	is	gone.	That’s	really	the	whole	story.

=== Page 13 ===
	
Q:
	But	you’re	doing	another	book.
	
Yeah,	 there’s	 more	 material,	 more	 fun	 stuff,	 but	 the	 first	 book	 is	 a	 complete
expression.	There	are	other	things	to	look	at	and	other	ways	of	looking.	We	think	of
enlightenment	 as	 the	 pinnacle,	 as	 the	 best	 possible	 thing,	 but	 it’s	 not.	 There’s
something	 far	 better	 and	 it’s	 the	 thing	 everyone	 who	 is	 interested	 in	 spiritual
enlightenment	is	really	after.	There’s	a	lot	to	be	said	on	that	subject	if	we	want	to
achieve	a	complete	expression	and	provide	a	valuable	service	to	the	reader.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	We’ve	received	many	questions	about	you	personally.	People	want	to	know
about	your	history,	your	relationships,	your	finances,	everything.	For	instance,	do
you	have	friends?	Do	you	socialize	beyond	the	student/teacher	relationship?
	
This	whole	thing	really	has	nothing	to	do	with	me	personally	and	it	would	be
counter-productive	to	shift	the	focus	onto	me.	A	mind	that	is	turned	outward	is
turned	away	from	the	serious	business	of	awakening.	People	who	aren’t	serious
about	this	stuff	are	always	looking	for	something	to	latch	onto,	some	external	thing
to	focus	on,	but	all	they	really	want	is	to	maintain	an	outward	focus.	There	are
plenty	of	people	and	organizations	that	exist	to	perform	that	very	function.
	
Q:
	It’s	easy	to	understand	why	people	would	be	curious.
	
The	seller/buyer	dynamic	is	the	principal	on	which	the	entire	spiritual	marketplace
operates,	 but	 anyone	 who	 wants	 to	 make	 real	 progress	 must	 leave	 all	 that
codependent,	mass-delusion	nonsense	behind.	This	isn’t	a	popularity	contest	or	a
democratic	 process.	 The	 major	 religions	 have	 countless	 millions	 of	 intelligent,
dedicated	adherents,	but	viewed	objectively,	they	are	nothing	more	than	childish
fairy	tales	unworthy	of	serious	consideration.	If	you	can’t	see	that,	if	you	can’t	get
that	far,	if	you	can’t	break	free	of	that	rancid	consumer	mindset,	then	that’s	where
you	should	be	shining	the	light	of	intellect,	not	on	some	guy	who	wrote	some	book.
	
I’m	not	relevant	to	anyone’s	search.	I’m	just	a	finger	pointing	at	the	moon.	There’s
nothing	to	be	learned	from	the	finger.	Everybody’s	eager	to	find	a	distraction	from
the	real	work	of	waking	up,	but	that’s	all	it	is,	a	distraction.	I’m	a	private	person	and
I	have	no	interest	in	participating	in	anyone’s	evasive	maneuvers.
	
Q:
	You	say	you’ve	stopped	teaching.	How	did	you	come	to	that	decision?

=== Page 14 ===
	
There	was	no	decision	involved,	just	an	observation.	It’s	easier	to	understand	if	we
state	it	more	accurately.	It’s	not	that	I	stopped	teaching;	it’s	that	I	reached	the	end	of
the	learning	process	necessary	to	bring	the	book	into	being.	Everything,	it	turns	out,
was	about	the	book.	The	many	hundreds	of	hours	I’ve	spent	in	dialog	with	seekers
at	all	levels	of	comprehension	was	a	part	of	the	book’s	process	of	becoming.	The
completion	of	the	book	marked	the	conclusion	of	the	teaching	thing.
	
Q:
	Because,	as	you’ve	said,	everything	you	have	to	say	is	in	the	book?
	
Because	everything	was	always	about	the	book.	Not	in	the	sense	that	I	planned	it
that	way,	but	in	the	sense	that	that’s	the	way	it	is.	You	could	look	at	in	a	very	linear
fashion	and	say	that	I	started	writing	the	book	on	such-and-such	a	date	and	finished
the	book	on	such-and-such	a	date,	but	that’s	a	very	narrow	and	incomplete	view.
That	 would	 be	 a	 very	 narrow	 and	 incomplete	 way	 of	 looking	 at	 any	 creative
journey.	Once	you	remove	the	blinders	of	time	and	space	and	see	the	flow	of	things
passing	into	and	out	of	being,	you	get	a	much	broader	and	less	linear	sense	of	the
flow	of	things.
	
Q:
	What	you’ve	called	an	oceanic	view.
	
Right.	You	can’t	really	isolate	an	oceanic	event,	a	wave,	for	instance.	Where	in
space	and	time	did	it	begin?	Where	in	space	and	time	does	it	end?	Who	can	say?	It’s
just	one	part	of	something	much	larger.	Why	try	to	chop	it	into	little	pieces?
	
Q:
	For	the	purposes	of	comprehension.
	
For	 the	 comfortable	 illusion	 of	 comprehension,	 sure.	 And	 that’s	 great,	 nothing
wrong	with	it	until	it’s	time	to	get	serious	and	dispense	with	comfortable	illusions.
But,	to	bring	it	back	to	the	teaching	thing,	I	didn’t	decide	or	choose	to	be	done	with
it,	I	simply	observed	that	it	was	over.	There	it	goes,	and	with	it,	frankly,	goes	my
interest	in	spiritual	matters.
	
Q:
	And	anyone	who	would	like	to	have	you	for	a	teacher?
	
Seeking	a	teacher	is	just	ego	seeking	a	reprieve;	a	stay	of	execution.	Giving	oneself
over	to	a	teacher	or	a	teaching	or	the	Beloved	Guru	or	whatever	is	all	about	staying
asleep,	not	waking	up.	The	first	rule	in	this	business	is	that	you	are	on	your	own.
Ego	clings	to	a	teacher	like	a	drowning	man	clings	to	a	log.	The	teacher	is	beloved

=== Page 15 ===
the	way	the	log	is	beloved.	The	teaching	is	sacred	the	way	the	log	is	sacred.	The	log
is	the	savior,	saving	us	from	sinking	into	the	cold	black	depths.
	
Q:
	But	what	of	the	students	who	achieved	their	awakening	under	you?
	
I	was	just	there	for	them.	A	midwife	can	hardly	take	credit	for	the	child.	A	signpost
can	hardly	take	credit	for	someone’s	successful	journey.
	
Q:
	Will	you	miss	teaching?	Do	you	think	you	might	return	to	it?
	
I	won’t	miss	it	and	I	don’t	think	I	could	return	to	it	if	I	wanted	to.	The	teacher	role	is
a	false	persona	just	like	any	other;	a	costume.	It’s	not	the	“real”	me	and	I	doubt	I
could	muster	the	energy	needed	to	animate	the	role	anymore.	It	was	a	garment	I
wore	and	have	now	cast	off.	It	served	its	purpose.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	Rather	than	aiding	people	in	their	quest	for	spiritual	enlightenment,	it	seems	like
you	sometimes	encourage	them	to	abandon	it.	You	seem	to	advise	people	to	see	it
for	what	it	really	is,	not	necessarily	so	they	can	attain	it,	but	so	they	can	stop	trying.
Does	that	seem	like	a	fair	assessment?
	
Definitely.	What	it	really	is	is	so	far	removed	from	what	many	seekers	are	seeking
that	it’s	only	humane	to	try	to	wave	them	off.	The	overwhelming	majority	of	those
who	read	this	will	be	best	served	in	this	way.	Only	a	very	tiny	percentage	will	be
what	I	think	of	as	serious	people;	people	who	are	actually	in	the	general	proximity
of	the	journey	of	awakening.	As	to	the	rest,	unfulfilled	seeking	is	its	own	thing—its
own	 life	 theme—and	 that’s	 what	 most	 people	 are	 really	 doing.	 For	 them,	 the
seeking	fills	a	very	real	need	and	that’s	the	point;	the	seeking,	not	the	finding.
	
Q:
	But	they	are	not	aware	that	they	are	seeking	for	the	experience	of	seeking,	and
not	for	the	actual	attainment	of	that	which	is	sought?
	
Sure,	necessarily	so.	And	here	I	should	remind	you	that	in	the	context	of	being	a
human	being	on	planet	earth,	seeking	truth	makes	sense	and	finding	it	doesn’t.
	
Q:
	You’ve	actually	said	that	enlightenment	is	a	bit	silly.
	
Yeah,	the	whole	business	is	a	little	goofy.
	

=== Page 16 ===
Q:
	It’s	strange	to	hear	an	enlightened	master	refer	to	spiritual	enlightenment	as
“goofy.”
	
I	don’t	know.	It’s	all	goofy.	What’s	not	goofy?	The	First	Noble	Truth	isn’t	“Life	is
suffering,”	it’s	“Life	is	goofy.”	The	goofiest	people	are	the	ones	who	take	it	the
most	seriously,	and	no	one	takes	it	more	seriously	than	someone	who	wants	to
awaken	from	it.
	
Q:
	So,	spiritual	seekers	are	the	goofiest	people?
	
Well,	the	world	is	full	of	strangely	serious	people.
	
Q:
	Are	you	trying	to	avoid	saying	that	spiritual	seekers	are	the	goofiest	people?
	
No,	I’m	not	saying	that	because	I	don’t	think	spiritual	seekers	in	general	are	all	that
serious.	Someone	who	is	truly	in	the	process	of	awakening	would	be	the	most
serious	imaginable	person	in	the	world,	but	that	doesn’t	apply	to	many	people.
	
Q:
	Enlightenment	is	usually	touted	as	the	greatest	of	all	achievements,	as	self-
perfection,	as	the	highest	aim	of	humanity,	the	ultimate	goal	of	every	search,	but
you	make	it	seem	almost	pointless	at	times.
	
Well,	I	wouldn’t	want	to	give	the	impression	that	it’s	almost	pointless.	It’s	perfectly
pointless.	Awakening	to	your	true	nature	is	like	dying;	it’s	a	certainty,	inevitable.
You’re	going	to	get	there	no	matter	what	you	do,	so	why	rush?	Enjoy	your	life,	it’s
free.	Cosmic	Consciousness	and	Altered	States	and	Universal	Mind	are	the	names
of	rides	in	this	vast	and	fascinating	dualistic	amusement	park.	So	are	Poverty	and
Disease	and	Despair.	Enlightenment,	though,	is	not	another	ride.	Enlightenment
means	leaving	the	park	altogether,	but	why	leave	the	park?	In	the	park	you	can	be	a
saint	or	a	yogi	or	a	billionaire	or	a	world	leader	or	a	warlord.	Be	good,	be	evil.
Happiness,	misery,	bliss,	agony,	victory,	defeat,	it’s	all	here.	What’s	the	big	rush?
When	the	time	comes	to	leave	the	park,	you’ll	know	and	you’ll	go,	but	there’s
certainly	nothing	to	be	gained	by	it.
	
Q:
	So	you	encourage	seekers	to	abandon	the	search.
	
I’m	not	trying	to	encourage	or	discourage,	I’m	just	trying	to	express	something	that
is	 difficult	 to	 express	 and	 about	 which	 virtually	 everyone	 with	 an	 interest	 is
egregiously	misinformed.
	

=== Page 17 ===
Q:
	As	you	say	in	the	book:
	
“
In	most	cases,	the	enlightenment	being	bought	and	sold	is	not	enlightenment	at	all,
but	a	state	of	consciousness	so	crazy-ass	wonderful	that	you’d	have	to	be	an	idiot
not	to	want	it.	So	insidiously	wonderful,	in	fact,	that	its	radiance	has	blinded	untold
millions	of	seekers	to	the	fact	that	it	doesn’t	exist.”
	
Q:
	Does	this	seem	to	capture	it?
	
Essentially.	The	enlightenment	that	seems	desirable	isn’t	enlightenment,	and	that
aspect	of	us	which	is	able	to	desire	enlightenment	is	unable	to	achieve	it	won’t
survive	its	onset.	Day	destroys	night.
	
Q:
	So	seeking	is	doomed	to	failure?
	
That’s	a	matter	of	context.	I	look	at	spiritual	seekers	and	they	seem,	on	the	whole,
pretty	content.	Maybe	that’s	because	what	they’re	really	seeking	is	contentment.
Seeking	 enlightenment	 is	 an	 inherent	 paradox,	 but	 who’s	 really	 seeking
enlightenment?	In	the	introduction	to	her	book	Halfway	Up	the	Mountain:	The
Error	of	Premature	Claims	to	Enlightenment,	Mariana	Caplan	states:
	
The	reality	of	the	present	condition	of	contemporary	spirituality	in	the	West	is	one
of	grave	distortion,	confusion,	fraud,	and	a	fundamental	lack	of	education.
	
In	my	opinion	there’s	no	real	reason	to	discriminate.	The	East	is	no	better	off	in	this
regard	and	perhaps	much	worse.	She	also	says:
	
The	 subject	 of	 enlightenment	 itself	 is	 one	 of	 the	 biggest	 arenas	 of	 naiveté,
ignorance,	self-deceit,	and	confusion	in	contemporary	spirituality.	A	close	second	to
enlightenment	is	the	category	of	“mystical”	or	“spiritual”	experiences.
	
I	might	turn	it	around	and	say	that	contemporary	spirituality	is	one	of	the	biggest
arenas	 of	 naiveté,	 ignorance,	 self-deceit,	 and	 confusion	 in	 the	 quest	 for
enlightenment,	but	you	get	the	idea.
	
Q:
	It	seems	like	many	spiritual	teachers	adopt	the	names,	clothing	or	titles	of	their
spiritual	heritage,	but	you	steer	clear	of	those	trappings.
	
Well,	I	don’t	have	any	particular	teaching	or	lineage,	and	no	guru	ever	renamed	me
because	I	never	had	a	guru.	In	any	event,	I	wouldn’t	want	to	give	anyone	the

=== Page 18 ===
impression	that	truth	was	proprietary	or	the	exclusive	domain	of	some	foreign	or
ancient	culture.	Truth	is	one’s	personal	domain,	any	time,	any	place.	If	I	were	to
wear	robes	or	have	a	Hindu	name	or	a	Japanese	title	that	would	only	serve	to
mislead	those	who	ask	me	to	point	the	way.	I	don’t	point	East	or	West;	I	point	right
back	at	the	seeker.
	
Q:
	So	you	don’t	think	a	student	needs	a	guru?	That	seems	to	be	matter	of	endless
debate.
	
Whatever	it	is	they’re	seeking	in	Guru-based	traditions	might	require	a	guru,	I	have
no	idea.	I’m	defining	spiritual	enlightenment	as	truth-realization	and	that	doesn’t
require	anything	but	purity	of	intent.
	
Q:
	Purity	of	intent	meaning	like	you	describe	in	the	book	when	you	talk	about	your
own	journey?
	
I	had	a	student	named	Alexander.	At	one	point	in	his	awakening	he	decided	that	he
needed	access	to	a	library	in	Chicago.	I	never	knew	why,	but	he	was	sure	that	the
next	thing	he	needed	could	only	be	found	there.	So	he	started	hitchhiking	from	Los
Angeles	with	no	hesitation.	He	had	no	money	and	he	looked	unkempt	and	scary	so
he	had	trouble	getting	rides	and	had	to	do	a	lot	of	walking.	He	walked	right	through
his	soles	so	he	had	to	insert	folded	newspaper	inside	his	shoes	several	times	a	day.	It
was	winter,	so	he	had	to	do	odd	jobs	along	the	way	for	a	used	jacket,	boots,	food;
quite	an	ordeal.	Three	weeks	later	he	makes	it	to	Chicago.	He	sleeps	in	a	doorway,
eats	whatever	he	can	find.	He	carries	books	with	him	that	he	reads	whenever	the
demands	of	surviving	allow.
	
Q:
	That	sounds	like	a	grueling	hardship.
	
That’s	my	point.	If	you	were	to	use	the	word	hardship	to	Alexander	as	he	sat
exhausted,	cold	and	hungry	in	that	doorway,	he’d	have	just	stared	at	you	as	if	you
were	a	yapping	dog.	I’ll	also	point	out	that	six	months	earlier	Alexander	was	a	very
normal	guy	with	a	wife,	kids,	a	house	and	a	job.
	
There	is	no	hardship,	there’s	only	the	next	thing,	the	next	step,	the	next	battle.	The
point	is	always	to	get	the	next	door	unlocked.	The	bible	says	to	pluck	out	your	eye
if	it	offends	you.	If	Alexander’s	eye	were	preventing	him	from	opening	the	next
door,	it	wouldn’t	occur	to	him	not	to	remove	it.	That’s	the	fuel	that	drives	this
journey.	It’s	not	in	scriptures	or	temples.	It’s	no	one’s	to	give	or	withhold.	That’s
what	I	mean	by	purity	of	intent.

=== Page 19 ===
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	You	describe	a	process	of	awakening	that	generally	takes	two	years,	plus	another
ten	to	integrate,	yet	many	spiritual	teachers	describe	enlightenment	as	the	result	of
an	instantaneous	transformative	event.
	
I	would	guess	that	they’ve	undergone	the	kind	of	experience	that	Bucke	talks	about
in	the	book	Cosmic	Consciousness;	some	sort	of	mystical	insight	into	the	heart	of
creation	or	something	equally	transcendent	and	transformative.	Great	stuff.	I’ve	had
mystical	experiences	myself	and	I	wouldn’t	even	try	to	express	the	wonder	of	them.
But	the	idea	that	someone	can	awaken	to	no-self	in	a	flash	is	simply	absurd.	Such
people	are	talking	about	something	wonderful,	but	it’s	not	truth-realization.	It’s	not
abiding	non-dual	awareness.
	
Q:
	There’s	a	lot	of	talk	among	spiritual	teachers	suggesting	that	we’re	currently
undergoing	a	massive	shift	in	consciousness	and	that	mankind	is	entering	a	new	age
of	spiritual	upliftment.	Do	you	see	such	a	shift	taking	place?
	
No.	People	who	talk	about	an	enlightened	humanity	are	talking	about	a	world	where
the	lamb	lies	down	with	the	lion	and	everyone	is	happy	and	healthy	and	whole.	In
short,	a	world	without	conflict,	without	drama.	But	that	would	be	very	silly	since
the	whole	point	of	duality	is	division.	The	whole	point	of	opposites	is	opposition.
This	is	a	drama,	not	a	still-life,	and	no	awakened	being	would	ever	suggest	that
everything	wasn’t	just	perfect	the	way	it	is.
	
To	 return	 to	 the	 amusement	 park	 analogy,	 imagine	 a	 group	 of	 self-proclaimed
visionaries	who	want	to	smooth	out	all	the	roller	coasters	so	there	were	no	scary
plummets	or	loops,	just	long,	slow,	safe	circles.	Great,	but	what’s	the	point?
	
Anyone	who	says	there’s	a	shift	coming	and	those	who	follow	their	teaching	will
ride	the	wave	are	in	the	sales	business,	more	accurately,	they’re	in	the	business	of
selling	something	that’s	not	theirs	to	sell.	They	get	asked	why	no	one	who	buys	ever
receives	the	product,	and	this	is	a	stock	answer;	we’ll	all	make	the	big	shift	together.
That’s	how	they	keep	the	dogs	wagging	their	tails.
	
Q:
	From	the	book	it	seems	like	you	never	engaged	in	any	of	the	normal	spiritual
activities.	You’re	not	a	meditator,	you	never	used	a	koan,	never	had	a	mantra,	never
had	a	guru	or	teacher.	This	challenges	a	lot	of	people’s	closely	held	beliefs	about
how	spiritual	realization	is	attained.

=== Page 20 ===
	
I	never	thought	of	waking	up	as	a	spiritual	pursuit,	I	just	wanted	to	get	to	the	truth.
Looking	back,	I	can	see	where	I	might	have	used	the	word	infinity	in	a	koan-like
manner;	 kind	 of	 a	 Western	 version	 of	 mu.	 Infinity	 is	 beautiful;	 it	 destroys
everything	it	touches.	It	annihilates	all	concepts,	all	beliefs,	all	sense	of	self.	No
teacher,	teaching,	book	or	practice	could	ever	be	as	effective	as	simply	allowing	the
thought	of	infinity	to	slowly	devour	you.
	
Q:
	Even	more	so	than	Spiritual	Autolysis?
	
Spiritual	Autolysis	invariably	leads	to	infinity.	I	mean,	where	else?
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
