# Dr. Pillay Interview

Dr.	Pillay	Interview
	
These	 four	 questions	 came	 from	 Dr.	 Kriben	 Pillay,	 editor	 and	 founder	 of	 The
Noumenon	Journal.

=== Page 21 ===
	
	
Q:
	You’ve	referred	to	enlightenment	a	few	times	as	‘abiding	non-dual	awareness’.
Is	it	possible	to	say	more	about	what	this	is?
	
The	 term	 Non-Dual	 Awareness	 is	 an	 attempt	 to	 capture	 the	 living	 reality	 of
otherlessness	in	words.	This	term—Non-Dual	Awareness—seems	like	a	reasonable
portrayal	of	the	state	from	within	the	state.	The	word	Abiding	distinguishes	it	from
any	 of	 the	 fleeting	 states	 commonly	 mistaken	 for,	 or	 sold	 as,	 Spiritual
Enlightenment.
	
Actually,	 I	 think	 the	 worst	 term	 for	 Spiritual	 Enlightenment	 is	 Spiritual
Enlightenment.	As	I	said	in	the	book,	I	didn’t	realize	until	several	years	after	my
awakening	that	what	I	had	achieved/become	was	what	people	meant	when	they	said
Spiritual	Enlightenment;	at	least,	what	those	people	meant	who	used	the	term	to
mean	 the	 absolute	 state	 rather	 than	 a	 higher-level	 dreamstate	 like	 Unity
Consciousness.	 The	 experience	 of	 Unity	 Conscious	 certainly	 feels	 more	 like
something	you’d	want	to	call	Spiritual	Enlightenment,	but	it’s	not	lasting,	so	what	is
it?	A	sweet	dream.	The	most	wonderful	thing	we	can	experience,	I’d	agree,	but	not
a	permanent	awakening	from	delusion.
	
The	 best	 term	 might	 be	 Truth-Realization.	 The	 term	 Spiritual	 Enlightenment
perpetuates	 the	 mist-enshrouded,	 mountain-top	 mystique,	 whereas	 Truth-
Realization	sounds	natural,	reasonable,	and	within	reach.	Spiritual	Enlightenment	is
for	the	ultra-elite,	but	truth	is	everyone’s	business.
	
Q:
	 How	 would	 Spiritual	 Autolysis	 work	 if	 someone	 (still	 unenlightened)	 went
around	saying	that	enlightenment	is	‘abiding	non-dual	awareness’?
	
Exactly,	that’s	the	question.	Calling	it	Abiding	Non-Dual	Awareness	might	be	an
adequate	description	from	within,	but	is	it	useful	from	without?	Is	it	useful	for	the
seeker	to	know	and	call	it	by	that	name?	And	the	answer	is,	I	think,	not	very.
	
In	the	book,	I	made	an	effort	to	convey	the	daily	reality,	even	banality,	of	my
experience.	I	wanted	to	hold	myself	up	as	an	awakened	being	and	say	“Look,	this	is
it.	This	is	what	it’s	really	like.”	So	the	term	Abiding	Non-Dual	Awareness	serves
that	purpose,	but	it’s	probably	not	the	most	illuminating	term	for	the	seeker.
	
For	the	purposes	of	trying	to	achieve	this	state,	I	think	the	terms	No-Self,	Truth-
Realization,	and	Non-Duality	are	of	more	practical	value.

=== Page 22 ===
	
Q:
	 You	 mention	 that	 you	 enjoy	 books	 written	 by	 those	 who	 have	 attained
enlightenment	 and	 who	 write	 well	 about	 what	 it’s	 like.	 Can	 you	 name	 a	 few
authors?
	
I’m	going	to	sidestep	this	question	in	order	to	provide	a	more	pertinent	answer.	The
goal	of	the	genuine	seeker	is	always	to	take	the	next	step,	to	open	the	next	door.
Waking	up	is	not	a	scholastic	pursuit	or	a	conceptual	challenge.	The	ability	to	open
the	next	door	is	the	only	thing	that	matters,	and	the	key	can	come	in	any	package;	a
book,	a	stubbed	toe,	an	advertising	jingle,	a	leaf	of	grass.	If	your	intent	is	in	place,
then	the	universe	will	act	as	your	librarian	and	you’ll	always	have	you	what	you
need	when	you	need	it.
	
Q:
	Some	teachers	like	U.G.	Krishnamurti	posit	that	the	individual	can	do	nothing
about	becoming	enlightened	simply	because	it	means	the	end	of	the	individual	self-
sense.	You	are	emphatic	that	it	can	happen	through	conscious	intention,	and	that	it
should	take	no	longer	than	two	years	after	the	first	step	has	happened.	How	would
you	view	U.G.’s	view,	(and	Balsekar’s,	whom	you	quote),	because	it	brings	up	the
old	debate	of	destiny	and	free	will	in	the	pursuit	of	enlightenment?
	
Firstly,	the	debate	of	destiny	and	free	will	is	a	non-issue;	a	dry	hole.	It	is	based	on
false	assumptions	and	false	knowledge.	Through	clear-seeing,	rather	than	belief,
any	such	question	can	be	transcended/destroyed,	and	the	whole	matter	left	behind.
It’s	just	another	gate	to	get	stuck	behind	for	awhile	and	eventually	pass	beyond
when	you	discover	it	was	never	really	there.	Obviously,	no	answer	is	possible.	The
trick	is	in	seeing	that	the	question	too	is	not	possible.
	
Secondly,	yes,	I’m	emphatic.	Not	only	can	it	happen	through	conscious	intention,	it
can	only	happen	through	conscious	intention.
	
To	say	that	the	individual	can	do	nothing	to	break	free	of	dualistic	perception
because	it	results	in	non-dualistic	perception	is	nonsensical,	like	saying	a	living
being	can’t	step	off	a	cliff	because	it	results	in	death,	or	that	a	dreamer	can’t	wake
up	because	he’s	dreaming.
	
However,	if	U.G.	Krishnamurti	and	others	were	saying	that	self	cannot	achieve	no-
self,	then	that’s	perfectly	correct.	The	end	of	the	one	marks	the	beginning	of	the
other.	No	one	can	have	their	cake	and	eat	it	too,	despite	what	so	many	egotists	and
profiteers	would	have	us	believe.
	

=== Page 23 ===
Is	it	a	paradox?	Yes.	Can	it	be	explained	so	people	will	understand?	No.	Can	people
come	see	for	themselves	and	understand	it	directly?	Yes.	How?	Claw,	scratch,	bite,
and	burn.	Burn	everything.
	
Think	for	yourself	and	figure	out	what’s	true.	You	figure	out	what’s	true	through	a
process	of	elimination,	by	figuring	out	what’s	not	true.	That’s	the	master	key;
follow	the	truth.	Ultimately,	that’s	my	only	advice.	The	clock	is	ticking	and	you’re
completely	on	your	own.	Forget	concepts,	forget	philosophy,	forget	spirituality,
forget	what	anyone	else	says,	don’t	try	to	dictate	terms.	Just	think	for	yourself	and
figure	out	what’s	true.
	
You	can	do	it.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
