# Impersonating Jed McKenna

Impersonating	Jed	McKenna
	
But	with	the	clear	certitude	of	the	self’s	disappearance,	there	automatically	arose
the	question	of	what	had	fallen	away—what	was	the	self?	What,	exactly	had	it
been?	Then	too,	there	was	the	all-important	question:	what	remained	in	its	absence?
	
Bernadette	Roberts
	
	
No	man	is	a	prophet	in	his	own	country.
	That	line	keeps	running	through	my
mind	as	I	sit	over	lunch	with	my	sister	who	I	haven’t	seen	in	several	years.	These
days	I’m	the	enlightened	guy,	but	to	her	I’m	just	the	bratty	kid	who	couldn’t	make
eye	contact	when	she	wore	a	bikini.
	
It’s	summer	‘01	and	we’re	having	lunch	in	lower	Manhattan.	She	read	a	preview
copy	of	Damnedest	and	has	had	a	few	months	to	digest	it.	It	was	very	nice	of	her	to
read	it	because	it’s	really	not	her	kind	of	thing.	She’s	a	good	citizen;	a	successful
executive,	 wife,	 mother,	 Republican,	 tennis	 nut,	 Christian-ish,	 and	 all-round
productive	member	of	society.	(She	once	told	me	she	was	raising	her	children	to	be
productive	members	of	society	and	I	winced	so	hard	I	almost	chipped	a	tooth.)
She’s	a	wonderful	person,	but	not	a	member	of	the	demographic	the	book	speaks	to.
	

=== Page 24 ===
There’s	a	plate	of	chilled	pasta	in	front	of	me	and	a	salad	in	front	of	her.	We’re	both
drinking	iced	tea.	She’s	runs	the	creative	side	of	a	medium-sized	ad	agency	and,	I
have	no	doubt,	she’s	very	good	at	it.	She’s	taking	time	out	of	her	very	hectic
schedule	to	have	lunch	with	me.	After	this,	I’m	going	to	the	park	to	lay	in	the	grass
and	watch	people	play	with	their	dogs.
	
Visiting	your	sister	and	having	lunch	shouldn’t	be	a	confusing	ordeal,	but	it	is.	Is
she	 really	 my	 sister?	 What	 does	 that	 mean?	 We	 share	 some	 history	 and
acquaintances,	such	as	childhood	and	parents.	Are	my	parents	really	my	parents?
Genetically	they	are	related	to	my	body,	but	the	person	who	lived	my	childhood	is
no	longer	here.	The	past	I	share	with	this	person	is	about	as	real	and	important	to
me	as	if	I’d	read	it	in	a	brochure.
	
The	problem	is	that	these	people,	my	family,	are	all	related	to	my	shell,	and	I’m	not.
They’re	looking	at	the	outer	Jed	McKenna	and	assuming	an	inner	Jed	McKenna.
I’m	 inside	 Jed	 McKenna	 looking	 out	 and	 I	 can’t	 really	 remember	 what	 he’s
supposed	to	do	or	say.	It’s	all	fakery.	I’m	an	actor	playing	a	role	for	which	I	feel	no
connection	 and	 have	 no	 motivation.	 There	 cannot	 be	 anything	 genuine	 in	 my
dealings	with	people	who	are	dealing	with	my	outer	garment.	(The	whole	thing	is
further	entangled	by	the	fact	that	there’s	no	“I”	inhabiting	my	shell,	just	a	fading
echo,	but	let’s	not	go	down	that	road	just	now.)
	
Actually,	it’s	not	really	confusing.	I	possess	not	the	least	shred	of	doubt	about	who
and	what	I	am.	The	tricky	thing	is	that	who	and	what	I	am	is	not	related	to	this
pretty,	professional,	salad-eating	woman	across	from	me.	By	coming	to	this	lunch	I
have	inserted	myself	into	a	situation	where	I	do	not	belong.	I	am	an	imposter.	I	have
some	residual	fondness	for	my	sister	and	if	she	died	I’d	be	saddened	to	think	that
she	was	no	longer	in	the	world,	but	the	simple	fact	is	that	our	former	relationship	no
longer	exists.
	
Okay,	so	why	am	I	telling	you	this?
	
Because	that’s	what	I	do.	I	try	to	hold	this	enlightenment	thing	up	for	display	and
this	seems	like	an	interesting	aspect	of	the	whole	deal.	How	do	you	relate	to	the
people	who	were	most	important	to	you	before	awakening	from	the	dream	of	the
segregated	self?
	
She	asks	why	I’m	in	town.
	

=== Page 25 ===
“My	astrologers	told	me	it	was	a	good	time	to	get	away	and	not	try	to	accomplish
anything.	They	said	that	ketu	and	rahu	wouldn’t	be	letting	me	get	anything	done	for
awhile	anyway—”
	
I	look	up	and	see	that	she	has	stopped	chewing	in	mid-mouthful	and	is	staring	at	me
incredulously.
	
“What?”
	
“My	astrologers—”
	
“You’re	not	serious.	You	have	astrologers?”
	
Oh	yeah,	I	guess	that	sounds	weird.	I	was	vaguely	aware	that	I	was	trying	to	be
funny	by	starting	a	sentence	with	“My	astrologers	told	me—”	but	what’s	a	little
amusing	to	me	is	other-worldly	to	her.	Might	as	well	have	fun	with	it.
	
“I	have	dozens	of	astrologers.	I	can’t	swing	a	dead	cat	without	hitting	someone
who’s	doing	my	chart	or	explaining	how	my	future	will	unfold;	advising	me	on
pretty	much	everything.”
	
Her	expression	doesn’t	change.	“You	have	astrologers?”
	
“Lots.	Gotta	beat	‘em	off	with	a	stick.”
	
“And	they	tell	you…	they	tell	you	what	the	future	holds?	What	you	should	do?
When	you	should	do	it?	What	you	should	avoid?	Is	that	what	we’re	talking	about?”
	
“I	suppose.”
	
She	resumes	chewing	but	the	wide-eyed	gaze	remains.	There’s	a	chasm	in	this
conversation	across	which	there’s	no	point	trying	to	communicate.	She	knows	I’m
into	some	serious	weirdness,	but	not	how	much	or	what	kind.	I	don’t	really	have
astrologers,	of	course,	but	in	those	days	it	did	seem	like	I	was	surrounded	by
students	of	Eastern	and	Western	astrology	who	were	always	very	eager	to	share
their	readings.
	
“What	do	you	do	with	all	that	information?”
	

=== Page 26 ===
“Me?	Nothing.	I	mean,	I	don’t	ask	for	it.	It’s	not	like	I	wake	up	and	summon	the
court	astrologers	to	plan	my	day.”
	
“It	sounds	like	you	do.”
	
“I	was	speaking	lightly.”
	
I’m	trying	to	skip	playfully	along	the	surface	of	this	conversation.	I	don’t	want	to
sink	down	into	the	kind	of	answer	I’d	give	a	serious	student.	The	truth	is	that	I	don’t
possess	any	mechanism	that	would	allow	me	to	be	curious	or	concerned	about	the
future,	but	saying	that	doesn’t	make	for	breezy	conversation.
	
“Jesus,”	she	says,	shaking	her	head.	“My	little	brother	has	his	own	astrologers.”
	
“Well,	they’re	not	really	mine.	They’re	just	in	attendance,	so	to	speak.”
	
I’m	used	to	conversing	with	people	who	aren’t	awake	and	aren’t	happy	about	it.
Everything	else	is	chit-chat;	talking	for	the	sake	of	talking,	reinforcing	the	illusion
of	self.	I’m	not	against	it,	I	just	don’t	care	to	participate	in	it.
	
“So,	you	obviously	have	a	great	deal	of	influence	over	your	students,”	she	says	as
she	sips	her	iced	tea.	I	mull	her	statement	over	and	decide	that	I	don’t	have	a
response.	I	take	another	bite	of	pasta,	wishing	I’d	ordered	something	with	meat.
	
“I	mean,”	she	says,	“they	obviously	hold	you	in	very	high	regard.	That’s	quite	a
responsibility.”
	
She	thinks,	quite	understandably,	that	she’s	my	big	sister	and	we’re	having	a	nice
little	catch-up	lunch.	She’s	been	thrown	a	curve	with	this	little-brother/spiritual-
master	thing	and	she’s	trying	to	handle	it.	Does	she	think	I’m	a	fraud?	Does	she
think	I’m	running	a	game?	Does	she	think	that	underneath	it	all	I’m	still	really	her
little	 brother?	 I	 don’t	 know	 and	 I	 don’t	 much	 care.	 The	 fact	 that	 she’s	 read
Damnedest	doesn’t	mean	that	she	and	I	can	speak;	it	means	she	should	know	we
can’t.	She	doesn’t	seem	to	be	clear	on	that.	Maybe	she	thinks	the	enlightenment
thing	is	just	my	day	job	and	that	I	can	step	out	of	that	role	to	be	with	someone	who
knows	the	real	me.
	
“I	don’t	know.	I	suppose	it’s	a	responsibility.”
	

=== Page 27 ===
“You	don’t	know?	Obviously	these	people	are	strongly	influenced	by	you.	You
don’t	think	that’s	a	big	responsibility?”
	
I	shrug.	The	first	thing	she	said	to	me	when	we	got	together	was	that	I	wasn’t
dressed	well	enough	for	the	restaurant.	Such	a	statement	is	so	alien	to	me	that	I
could	only	shrug.	Now	it	seems	that	every	statement	she	makes	is	so	alien	to	me
that	I	can	only	shrug.
	
In	accepting	this	lunch	engagement,	my	hope	was	that	I	could	slip	back	into	my	old
persona	enough	to	manage	a	civil	meal.	That	was	too	hopeful.	I	can	no	longer
impersonate	myself	and	I	am	simply	unable	to	formulate	a	reply	to	anything	she	has
to	say;	I’ve	forgotten	my	lines.	We	don’t	share	a	common	tongue	and	there’s	no	way
I	can	make	her	see	that.	From	her	point	of	view	she’s	saying	perfectly	normal,
conversational	things.
	
“Yes,	I	suppose	it’s	a	big	responsibility,”	I	say,	trying	to	say	something	that	sounds
like	I’m	saying	something.
	
She	 lowers	 her	 voice.	 “You	 hear	 a	 lot	 about	 people	 in	 your	 position	 taking
advantage	of	that	responsibility	for,”	she	lowers	her	voice,	“unsavory	purposes.	I
hope	you	would	never	do	something	like	that.”
	
I	could	simply	tell	her	what	the	preview	copy	of	the	book	was	meant	to	tell	her,	that
we	are	no	longer	related	because	what	I	am	now	doesn’t	relate.	But	why	say	it?	To
satisfy	myself?	It	wouldn’t.	To	inform	her?	It	wouldn’t.
	
“You	mean	sex	stuff?	That	sort	of	thing?”
	
“Whatever.	Power	corrupts.	I	just	hope	you’ll	be	careful.”
	
Sweet.	Big	sister	giving	little	brother	some	advice	on	how	to	shoulder	the	burden	of
power.	Being	in	advertising,	perhaps	she	thinks	we	have	something	in	common;
wielding	the	power	to	influence	people’s	thoughts.	Maybe	she	thinks	we’re	in	the
same	business,	I	don’t	know.
	
I	set	down	my	fork	and	sit	back.	“Well,	when	I	walk	through	the	house,	I	always
have	someone	proceed	me	with	a	boom-box	playing	Darth	Vader	theme	music	to
lend	a	weighty	and	ominous	air	to	my	approach.	And	I	certainly	don’t	dress	like
this.	I	have,	you	know,	the	robes,	the	beads,	and	I	always	carry	fresh	flowers.	Just
trappings,	all	very	tiresome,	really,	but	the	underlings	expect	it.	There	was	a	little

=== Page 28 ===
resistance	at	first	to	having	them	call	me	Shri	Shri	Shri	Shri	Jed,	but	they	got	the
hang	of	it.	And	remembering	to	speak	in	the	first	person	plural	there	and	singular
here	can	take	a	little	getting	used	to,	but	we	are—I	mean,	uh,	I	am—happy	to	make
the	effort.	Noblesse	oblige	and	all.”
	
She	stares	at	me	for	a	long	moment,	then	bursts	into	laughter.	I	guess	some	ice	has
broken	because	we	are	able	to	continue	in	a	lighter	and	friendlier	manner,	and
eventually	say	goodbye	with	genuine	fondness.
	
I	doubt	I’ll	ever	see	her	again,	but	I’m	happy	knowing	she’s	still	in	the	world.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
