# Blues for Buddha

Blues	for	Buddha
	
Whether	there	be	prophecies,	they	shall	fail;
whether	there	be	tongues,	they	shall	cease;
whether	there	be	knowledge,	it	shall	vanish	away.
	
For	we	know	in	part,	and	we	prophesy	in	part.
But	when	that	which	is	perfect	is	come,
then	that	which	is	in	part	shall	be	done	away.
	
When	I	was	a	child,	I	spake	as	a	child,
I	understood	as	a	child,
I	thought	as	a	child:
but	when	I	became	a	man,
I	put	away	childish	things.
	
1	Corinthians	13
	
	
Being	critical	of	Buddhism
	isn’t	easy.	Buddhism	is	the	most	likable	of	the	major
religions,	 and	 Buddhists	 are	 the	 perennial	 good	 guys	 of	 modern	 spirituality.
Beautiful	traditions,	lovely	architecture,	inspiring	statuary,	ancient	history,	the	Dalai
Lama;	what’s	not	to	like?
	

=== Page 29 ===
Everything	about	Buddhism	is	just	so—nice.	No	fatwahs	or	jihads,	no	inquisitions
or	crusades,	no	terrorists	or	pederasts,	just	nice	people	being	nice.	In	fact,	Buddhism
means	niceness.	Nice-ism.
	
At	least,	it	should.
	
Buddha	means	Awakened	One,	so	Buddhism	can	be	taken	to	mean	Awake-ism.
Awakism.	It	would	therefore	be	natural	to	think	that	if	you	were	looking	to	wake	up,
then	Buddhism,	i.e.,	Awakism,	would	be	the	place	to	look.
	
	
The	Light	is	Better	Over	Here
	
Such	 thinking,	 however,	 would	 reveal	 a	 dangerous	 lack	 of	 respect	 for	 the
opposition.	 Maya,	 goddess	 of	 delusion,	 has	 been	 doing	 her	 job	 with	 supreme
mastery	 since	 the	 first	 spark	 of	 self-awareness	 flickered	 in	 some	 monkey’s
brainbox,	and	the	idea	that	the	neophyte	truth-seeker	can	just	sign	up	with	the
Buddhists,	read	some	books,	embrace	some	new	concepts	and	slam	her	to	the	mat
would	be	a	bit	on	the	naive	side,	(as	billions	of	sincere	but	unsuccessful	seekers
over	the	last	twenty-five	centuries	might	grudgingly	attest).
	
On	the	other	hand,	why	not?	How’d	this	get	so	turned	around?	It’s	just	truth.
Shouldn’t	truth	be,	like,	the	simplest	thing?	Shouldn’t	someone	who	wants	to	find
something	as	ubiquitous	and	unchanging	as	truth	be	able	to	do	so?	How	can	anyone
manage	 to	 not	 find	 truth?	 And	 here’s	 this	 venerable	 organization	 supposedly
dedicated	to	just	that	very	thing,	even	named	for	it,	and	it’s	a	total	flop.
	
So	what’s	the	problem?
	
	
Why	doesn’t	Buddhism	produce	Buddhas?
	
The	 problem	 arises	 from	 the	 fact	 that	 Buddhists,	 like	 everyone	 else,	 insist	 on
reconciling	the	irreconcilable.	They	don’t	just	want	to	awaken	to	the	true,	they	also
want	to	make	sense	of	the	untrue.	They	want	to	have	their	cake	and	eat	it	too,	so
they	end	up	with	nonsensical	theories,	divergent	schools,	sagacious	doubletalk,	and
zero	Buddhas.
	
Typical	of	their	insistence	on	reconciling	the	irreconcilable	is	the	Buddhist	concept
of	Two	Truths,	a	poignant	two-word	joke	they	don’t	seem	to	get,	and	yet	this	sort	of

=== Page 30 ===
perversely	irrational	thinking	is	near	the	very	heart	of	the	failed	search	for	truth.	We
don’t	want	truth,	we	want	a	particular	truth;	one	that	doesn’t	threaten	ego;	one	that
doesn’t	exist.	We	insist	on	a	truth	that	makes	sense	given	what	we	know,	not
knowing	that	we	know	nothing.
	
Nothing	about	Buddhism	is	more	revealing	than	the	Four	Noble	Truths	which,	not
being	true,	are	of	dubious	nobility.	They	form	the	basis	of	Buddhism,	so	it’s	clear
from	the	outset	that	the	Buddhists	have	whipped	up	a	proprietary	version	of	truth
shaped	more	by	market	forces	than	any	particular	concern	for	the	less	consumer-
friendly,	albeit	true,	truth.
	
Buddhism	 may	 be	 spiritually	 filling,	 even	 nourishing,	 but	 insofar	 as	 truth	 is
concerned,	it’s	just	the	same	old	junkfood	in	a	different	package.	You	can	eat	it
every	day	of	your	life	and	die	exactly	as	awakened	as	the	day	you	signed	up.
	
	
Bait	&	Switch
	
Buddhism	 is	 a	 classic	 bait-and-switch	 operation.	 We’re	 attracted	 by	 the
enlightenment	in	the	window,	but	as	soon	as	we’re	in	the	door	they	start	steering	us
over	to	the	compassion	aisle.	Buddhists	could	be	honest	and	change	their	name	to
Compassionism,	but	who	wants	that?
	
There’s	the	rub.	They	can’t	get	us	in	the	door	with	compassion,	and	they	can’t
deliver	on	the	promise	of	enlightenment.
	
It’s	not	limited	to	compassion,	of	course.	Their	shelves	are	stocked	with	all	sorts	of
goodies	and	enticements,	practically	anything	anyone	could	ever	want,	with	just	the
one	rather	notable	exception.
	
If	they	had	just	stopped	when	they	had	
Anicca
,	impermanence,	and	
Anatta
,	no-self,
then	they	would	have	had	a	true	and	effective	teaching	they	could	be	proud	of,
except	 there	 would	 be	 no	 they	 because	 Buddhism	 would	 have	 died	 with	 the
Buddha.	They’d	have	a	good	product,	but	no	customers.
	
This	untruth-in-advertising	is	the	kind	of	game	you	have	to	play	if	you	want	to	stay
successful	in	a	business	where	the	customer	is	always	wrong.	You	can	either	go	out
of	business	honestly,	or	thrive	by	giving	the	people	what	they	want.	What	they	say
they	want	and	what	they	really	want,	though,	are	two	very	different	things.
	

=== Page 31 ===
	
Me	Me	Me
	
To	the	outside	observer,	much	of	Buddhist	knowledge	and	practice	seems	focused
on	spiritual	self-improvement.	This,	too,	is	hard	to	speak	against,	except	within	the
context	of	awakening	from	delusion.	Then	it’s	easy.
	
There	is	no	such	thing	as	true	self,	so	any	pursuit	geared	toward	its	aggrandizement,
betterment,	upliftment,	elevation,	evolution,	glorification,	salvation,	etc,	is	utter
folly.	How	much	more	so	any	endeavor	undertaken	merely	to	increase	one’s	own
happiness	or	contentment	or,	I’m	embarrassed	just	to	say	it,	bliss?
	
Self	is	ego	and	ego	resides	exclusively	in	the	dreamstate.	If	you	want	to	break	free
of	the	dreamstate,	you	must	break	free	of	self,	not	stroke	it	to	make	it	purr	or	groom
it	for	some	imagined	brighter	future.
	
	
Maya’s	House	of	Enlightenment
	
The	trick	with	being	critical	of	so	esteemed	and	beloved	an	institution	is	not	to	get
dragged	down	into	the	morass	of	details	and	debate.	It’s	very	simple:	If	Buddhism	is
about	awakening,	people	should	be	waking	up.	If	it’s	not	about	awakening,	they
should	change	the	name.
	
Of	course,	Buddhism	isn’t	completely	unique	in	resorting	to	shoddy	marketing
tactics.	This	same	gulf	between	promise	and	performance	is	found	in	all	systems	of
human	spirituality.	We’re	looking	at	it	in	Buddhism	because	that’s	where	it’s	most
pronounced.	No	disrespect	to	the	Buddha	is	intended.	If	there	was	a	Buddha	and	he
was	 enlightened,	 then	 it’s	 Buddhism	 that	 insults	 his	 memory,	 not	 healthy
skepticism.	Blame	the	naked	emperor’s	retinue	of	lackeys	and	lickspittles,	not	the
unbeguiled	lad	who	merely	states	the	obvious.
	
Buddhism	is	arguably	the	most	elevated	of	man’s	great	belief	systems.	If	you	want
to	enjoy	the	many	valuable	benefits	it	has	to	offer,	then	I	wouldn’t	presume	to	utter
a	syllable	against	it.	But,	if	you	want	to	escape	from	the	clutches	of	Maya,	then	I
suggest	you	take	a	closer	look	at	the	serene	face	on	all	those	golden	statues,	and	see
if	it	isn’t	really	hers.
	
	
*	*	*

=== Page 32 ===
	
	
	
Bonus	Content	from

=== Page 33 ===
Spiritually	Incorrect	Enlightenment
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
