# Jed McKenna Interview (Spiritually Incorrect)

Jed	McKenna	Interview
	
Q:
	Spiritually	Incorrect	Enlightenment	starts	out	strangely.	First,	with	the	Call	me
Ahab	 line	 in	 the	 first	 chapter,	 then	 the	 next	 two	 chapters	 which	 are	 a	 little
unsettling,	almost	alienating.	What	was	the	thinking	there?
	
I	have	a	lot	of	notes	and	I	write	a	lot	of	stuff	that	doesn’t	get	into	the	books.	Usually,
as	a	book	takes	shape,	as	with	any	creative	process,	the	stuff	that	doesn’t	belong
gets	weeded	out.	That’s	what	I	thought	might	happen	with	some	or	all	of	those	first
three	chapters,	especially	the	second	and	third,	the	California	chapters.	I	was	a	little
surprised	they	stayed	in.
	
Q:
	But	it’s	you	that	left	them	in.
	
Yes	and	no.	I’m	a	participant	in	the	creation	of	these	books	but	I’m	also	very	much
an	observer.	I	receive	clear	direction	and	I	follow	it,	whether	it’s	writing	books	or
anything	else.	I	move	with	the	tides	on	an	ocean	where	the	difference	between	self
and	 other	 becomes	 merely	 theoretical.	 Even	 in	 the	 dreamstate	 my	 character	 is
almost	fully	dissolved	back	into	the	ocean	so,	for	instance,	an	outside	observer
might	say	that	Jed	McKenna	wrote	these	books,	but	from	my	perspective	there	is	no
such	distinction.	Distinctions	are	a	dreamstate	phenomenon	and	even	though	I	exist
and	 write	 in	 the	 dreamstate	 to	 publish	 dreamed	 up	 books	 for	 a	 dreamed	 up
readership,	I	don’t	see	things	as	being	distinguished	from	one	another	the	way	I	did
before	awakening.	This	is	about	segregation	and	integration,	about	seeing	things	as
apart	where	there	is	no	apartness.	This	integration,	re-integration,	is	the	state	toward
which	everyone	is	in	constant	motion;	away	from	false	segregation	back	to	oneness.
This	constant	motion	resembles	a	degrading	orbit;	round	and	round,	closer	and
closer,	 gripped	 by	 invisible	 forces	 ceaselessly	 pulling	 us	 in,	 back	 to	 our	 own
centers,	the	one	center	of	all.	It	is	this	gravity	emanating	from	the	exact	center	of
self	that	powers	the	returning	motion	of	the	Tao.	Everyone	is	in	this	orbit.	Life	is	in
this	orbit.	The	First	Step,	on	the	other	hand,	is	the	abrupt	course	change	out	of	this
orbit	into	a	straightline	approach.	Until	the	First	Step	we’re	still	in	orbit.	After	the
First	Step,	life	in	orbit	is	over	and	collision	is	imminent.
	

=== Page 34 ===
Q:
	Collision	with	the	planet?
	
So	it	appears.	From	space	the	planet	might	look	like	God,	or	Truth,	or	True	Self,
something	like	that	depending	on	the	eye	of	the	beholder,	but	the	destination	is
always	the	same;	the	one	source,	the	gravity	well	that	reaches	out	from	the	center	of
the	planet	and	pulls	us	all	in.	Prior	to	the	First	Step,	one	maintains	a	gradually
accelerating	slow-approach	orbit.	After	the	First	Step,	one	shoots	like	a	missile
straight	at	the	planet’s	center,	heedless	of	consequences,	only	to	discover	at	the
moment	of	impact	that	there’s	really	no	planet,	no	gravity,	no	self,	no	nuthin’.
	
No	one	can	explain	this	in	a	way	that	makes	any	sense	so	the	answer	I	give	when
asked	is	come	see	for	yourself.	Break	out	of	orbit.	Don’t	worry	about	getting	to	the
planet,	a	decaying	orbit	will	get	you	there	sooner	or	later.	Everyone	wants	to	wake
up	by	hastening	or	altering	their	orbit	and,	as	the	results	clearly	indicate,	it	doesn’t
seem	to	make	any	difference.	There’s	only	one	way;	you	have	to	break	out	of	orbit.
That’s	the	First	Step	and	that	must	be	the	goal	of	the	person	in	orbit,	not	spiritual
enlightenment	or	Nirvana	or	any	of	that.	Yes,	it’s	a	suicide	run.	There	is	no	return,
no	turning	back.	There	will	be	nothing	to	come	back	to.	If	you’re	into	the	whole
happily-ever-after	thing,	stay	in	orbit	and	think	in	terms	of	karma	and	dharma	and
countless	lifetimes	in	which	to	follow	the	homeward	trek.	If	you’ve	had	enough	of
that	then	it’s	time	to	switch	your	attention	away	from	all	the	spiritual	gibberish	and
start	thinking	about	breaking	out	of	orbit	for	a	suicide	run.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	A	significant	part	of	your	audience	lives	in	California.	It	was	almost	painful	to
hear	 you	 say	 you	 hate	 LA	 and	 that	 part	 of	 the	 reason	 for	 that	 is	 probably
Californians.
	
Yeah.	I	swing	back	to	comment	on	that	later	in	the	book.	I’m	an	East	Coast	guy
bad-mouthing	the	West	Coast	is	all.	I	lived	in	Montecito	and	further	north	for	a	time
and	liked	it	well	enough,	the	East	just	seems	more	real	to	me.	All	I	can	think	about
when	I’m	in	Southern	California	is	getting	out,	but	it’s	only	a	personal	preference.	I
still	have	preferences	and	I	wanted	to	accentuate	that	apparent	paradox.	If	there’s
ever	 a	 third	 book	 there	 might	 not	 be	 too	 much	 in	 the	 way	 of	 my	 personal
preferences,	or	the	few	that	are	left	might	come	out	very	strongly	and	specifically.
To	me,	Southern	California	feels	like	the	Mecca	of	Ego.	A	strong	distaste	for	ego	is
really	the	last	of	my	strongly	held	preferences	and	it’s	not	likely	to	disappear.	This
is	the	ongoing	minimalization	of	self	I	talked	about	in	Damnedest.	I’m	kind	of
chronicling	the	second	decade	of	the	awakened	being	as	I	live	it.	I	can	forecast

=== Page 35 ===
trends,	but	then	I	have	to	live	them	too.	I	said	I’d	become	less	tolerant	and	I	am.
The	tattered	remnants	of	self	hang	loosely	from	me.	I	almost	have	to	clutch	at	them
to	have	any	presence	at	all.
	
Q:
	You	make	it	sound	like	the	awakening	process	continues	even	now.
	
In	a	way.	The	awakening	part	was	a	very	distinct	event,	like	a	nuclear	explosion,
and	occurred	for	me	many	years	ago.	The	post-awakening	process	taking	place
since	then	is	like	the	protracted	effects	of	radiation	poisoning.	Your	nose	doesn’t	fall
of	in	the	first	instant,	it	stays	on	for	awhile.	You	know	it’s	not	going	to	stay	on	for
long	so	you	enjoy	it	while	you	can.	You	know	what’s	coming,	you	know	it’s
inevitable;	you	don’t	fear	it	or	seek	to	avoid	it.	On	the	other	hand,	you’re	fond	of
your	nose.	I	have	a	fondness	for	my	nose	so	maybe	I	staple	it	on	or	use	a	little	duct
tape	 so	 I	 can	 keep	 it	 a	 little	 longer.	 I’m	 not	 making	 an	 argument	 for	 this	 or
defending	 a	 position,	 I’m	 just	 sharing	 my	 observations	 of	 the	 process.	 The
awakening	is	complete,	perfect,	and	irreversible,	but	no	outer	representation	can
reflect	the	inner	state.	At	any	moment	since	the	point	of	awakening	I	can	and	have
shaken	myself	like	a	wet	dog	to	cast	off	all	the	rags	of	self;	the	tatters	of	costume.
	
Q:
	So	you	can	throw	off	self	and	put	it	back	on?
	
Such	as	it	is.	It’s	in	an	advanced	state	of	decay	and	I	can’t	stop	or	reverse	that,	but	I
can	try	to	squeeze	some	further	use	out	of	what	remains.	I	suppose	I’ll	be	able	to
fake	my	own	personhood	for	as	long	as	I	live,	but	the	veneer	is	getting	pretty	thin.
	
Q:
	It’s	only	in	interacting	with	people,	with	ego,	that	this	is	a	problem?
	
Yes.	I	have	no	other	reason	to	slip	into	character.	It’s	not	really	much	of	a	problem,
though.	Not	interacting	with	people	is	no	great	hardship	for	me.
	
Q:
	And	it’s	not	theoretical,	right?	You’re	not	speculating,	you’re	describing	your
actual	experience?
	
Yes.	 My	 experience	 is	 that	 of	 a	 non-egoic	 being	 who	 can	 wrap	 himself	 in	 a
threadbare	ego	when	necessary.
	
Q:
	And	you	don’t	see	the	paradox?
	
The	whole	selfless	self	thing?	I’ll	address	this	by	saying	that	the	enlightened	state	is
not,	as	is	commonly	supposed,	the	special	state.	The	unenlightened	state	is	the

=== Page 36 ===
magical,	 mysterious,	 incomprehensible	 state.	 Awake	 is	 just	 awake.	 It’s	 not
something	 more,	 it’s	 everything	 less.	 My	 state	 is	 natural	 and	 easy.	 I	 carry	 no
baggage.	I	labor	under	no	delusion.	I	don’t	spend	my	lifeforce	animating	a	fictional
persona.	All	paradox	lies	with	the	unawakened	state.	The	awakened	don’t	have
something	 that	 the	 unawakened	 are	 missing,	 it’s	 the	 other	 way	 around.	 The
unawakened	possess	massive	structures	of	false	belief.	They	create	and	maintain
these	vast	realms	of	past,	present	and	future;	of	great	meaning	and	importance;	of	a
deep	 and	 wide	 emotional	 range;	 all	 woven	 together	 out	 of	 sheer	 nothingness.
Something	from	nothing;	that’s	the	magic,	that’s	the	special	state.	The	unawakened
state	is	the	one	that	requires	such	ceaseless	dedication	and	devotion	and	which
seems	so	fantastically	improbable.	The	awakened	state	is	nothing	compared	to	that.
	
Q:
	That	doesn’t	sound	so	good.
	
I	never	said	it	was.
	
Q:
	Are	you	saying	it’s	not?
	
No.	The	lifeforce	I’m	not	using	to	project	a	false	self	is	now	available	for	much
more	fun	and	interesting	purposes.	It’s	a	whole	different	universe	once	all	that	petty
self	crap	has	been	left	behind.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	So,	back	to	the	first	unsettling	chapters—
	
Unsettling	is	the	right	way	to	think	of	it.	That	probably	reflects	the	higher	intention
at	work.	I	look	at	those	first	few	chapters	like	an	establishing	shot	in	film,	providing
the	viewer	with	an	overview	of	where	events	are	taking	place.	The	first	chapter,
Loomings,	which	is	the	title	of	the	first	chapter	in	Moby-Dick,	is	like	striking	a
gong	to	wake	everyone	up	and	let	them	know	that	the	show	has	started	and	that	it’s
a	little	weird;	that	something	different	is	going	on.	Then	the	two	California	chapters
continue	this	sort	of	destabilizing	weirdness.	The	single	question	underlying	the
California	chapters	is	stated	in	chapter	two:	“Sure,	you	all	meditate	and	do	whatever
spiritual	practices,	but	you	know	that’s	not	really	going	anywhere,	right?”	That’s	an
unsettling	question.	Anyone	reading	the	book	should	be	taken	up	short	by	that;	put
themselves	at	that	dinner	table	and	look	at	their	own	Operation	Fizzle	and	ask
themselves	 serious	 questions	 about	 what	 they’re	 really	 doing	 with	 all	 this
spirituality	stuff.
	

=== Page 37 ===
Q:
	So	you	were	intentionally	offensive?
	
Part	of	the	intent	might	have	been	to	start	out	with	a	challenge.	Suicide,	Nazis,
catshit,	teen	angst.	Is	it	funny	or	offensive?	Good	spirited	or	mean?	Is	Jed	arrogant
or	something	else?	Do	I	like	him?	What	does	it	mean	if	I	don’t?	Upon	whom	would
that	really	reflect?
	
Q:
	Can	an	enlightened	person	behave	this	way?
	
Right,	can	this	guy	be	enlightened	if	he	acts	this	way?	Talks	this	way?	Sticks	this
semi-belligerent	stuff	in	the	front	of	his	book?	Where’s	the	unconditional	love?
Where’s	the	compassionate	heart?	Or,	wait,	maybe	it’s	my	preconceived	notions
about	spirituality	and	enlightenment	that	are	screwy.	Maybe	I	have	to	go	back	and
think	 about	 what	 it	 would	 really	 be	 like	 to	 be	 an	 enlightened	 person	 in	 an
unenlightened	 world.	 Maybe	 I’ve	 been	 sold	 a	 bill	 of	 goods.	 Maybe	 it’s	 the
sweetness	and	light	version	that	doesn’t	make	sense.
	
And	yet,	in	the	second	book	I	would	hope	that	the	reader	has	read	the	first	book	and
has	some	theoretical	idea	of	what	enlightenment—truth-realization,	abiding	non-
dual	awareness—really	means.	The	second	book	seems	like	more	fun	to	me	if	you
approach	 it	 from	 the	 perspective	 of	 having	 granted	 that	 Jed	 McKenna	 is	 an
awakened	being.	We’ve	already	established	that	in	the	first	book,	so	that	should	free
us	up	to	explore,	to	see	what	it’s	all	about,	what	it’s	like	to	be	in	this	state,	to	ask
better	questions;	not,	Is	this	guy	enlightened?,	but,	What	does	it	mean	that	an
enlightened	being	acts	this	way?	What	am	I	being	shown	about	the	awakened	state?
	
I	don’t	want	to	make	this	all	sound	too	carefully	thought	out	because	the	books
really	fall	into	place	on	their	own.	This	is	just	my	interpretation	for	how	it	is	and	my
reasons	for	not	changing	it.
	
Q:
	You’re	interpreting	your	own	book	just	like	a	reader	would?
	
Something	like	that.	Those	were	the	first	three	chapters	since	the	first	draft	and	they
never	moved.	I	looked	at	them	many	times,	wondering	if	it	wasn’t	a	bit	much,	and
finally	realized	that	in	a	book	called	Spiritually	Incorrect	Enlightenment,	a	bit	much
was	probably	about	right.	Also,	I	trust	the	thing	that	put	them	there	more	than	I	trust
the	thing	in	me	that	wanted	to	change	them.
	
And	really,	why	not	put	it	right	up	front?	The	book	is	called	Spiritually	Incorrect
Enlightenment,	but	what	does	that	mean?	It	means	that	getting	there	and	being	there

=== Page 38 ===
isn’t	what	we’ve	been	told.	You	look	at	modern	spirituality	and	all	you	see	is	the
same	tired	drivel	being	endlessly	recycled;	love,	compassion,	no-mind,	higher	self,
levels	of	consciousness	and	so	on.	A	noxious	muck	in	which,	as	is	amply	borne	out
by	results,	no	clarity	or	progress	is	possible.	There	is	no	greater	failure	in	the	history
of	mankind	than	the	spiritual	quest,	the	search	for	truth,	and	yet	everyone	continues
just	as	everyone	always	has,	using	the	same	maps	and	directions,	the	same	guides
and	the	same	routes.	It’s	nuts.	Sooner	or	later	you	have	to	come	to	the	point	of
saying,	“Hey,	wait	a	minute,	this	is	crazy.	I	want	to	get	off	this	merry-go-round	and
get	moving.	How	do	I	break	free	from	this	cycle	of	bumper-sticker	platitudes	and
actually	take	some	responsibility	for	my	life?”	If	you’re	reading	books	by	Jed
McKenna,	 that’s	 what	 you’re	 playing	 at	 the	 edge	 of;	 self-determination.	 Not
because	it’s	of	any	importance,	or	to	please	anyone,	or	to	line	up	a	cozy	afterlife,
but	simply	because	it’s	honest.	Ultimately,	that’s	all	we’re	talking	about;	living	an
honest	life.	Being	honest.
	
Q:
	So	what’s	the	solution?	How	do	we	break	free?
	
Look	at	Hercules	in	the	Augean	stables.	He	could	have	picked	up	a	shovel	and	spent
his	entire	life	shoveling	shit,	never	making	any	progress	because	they’re	always
making	it	faster	than	anyone	can	shovel	it.	What	does	he	do	instead?	He	reroutes	a
river	so	it	flows	through	the	stables	and	with	this	one	act	all	the	muck	is	washed
away	once	and	for	all.	That’s	the	solution;	don’t	try	to	do	battle	with	confusion	and
mediocrity.	The	solution	to	a	problem	does	not	exist	at	the	level	of	the	problem.
Rise	above	the	level	at	which	confusion	and	mediocrity	exist.	Think	for	yourself.
Look	 for	 yourself.	 See	 the	 big	 picture.	 Life	 is	 a	 one-man	 show.	 Turn	 up	 the
houselights	and	see	for	yourself,	directly,	without	the	obstruction	and	distorting
filters	of	interpreters	or	middlemen.	What	could	be	simpler?
	
Q:
	You’re	saying	that	people	should—
	
I	have	no	opinion	about	what	anyone	should	or	shouldn’t	do.	Some	people	like	the
smell	of	manure.	In	the	context	of	this	discussion,	most	people	do.	It’s	warm	and
familiar	and	safe.	When	it	starts	smelling	like	shit,	like	stagnation	and	death,	like	a
dark,	fetid	dungeon,	then	you	start	wanting	to	do	something	to	get	away	from	it.
When	that	happens,	then	you’re	starting	to	leave	all	the	swami	wannabes	behind
and	represent	your	own	interests.	At	that	point	I	can	provide	some	simple	guidance:
Open	your	eyes.	Look.	See	why	it	smells	so	bad.	Nourish	your	discontent.	Cultivate
negative	self-esteem.	Elevate	self-loathing	to	a	spiritual	practice.	Proceed	on	the
hypothesis	that	everything	you	are	is	a	lie	and	everything	you	know	is	wrong	and
try	to	disprove	it.

=== Page 39 ===
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	Do	you	think	there’ll	be	a	third	book?
	
Maybe.	I	seem	to	enjoy	the	writing	so	I	guess	I’m	not	done	with	it.	There	are
several	things	in	the	works;	maybe	something	will	actually	materialize.
	
Q:
	Do	you	think	there	might	be	more	surprises	like	with	Moby-Dick?
	
I	don’t	know.	I	certainly	didn’t	see	the	white	whale	coming	until	it	was	right	on	top
of	me.
	
Q:
	Besides	the	revelations	about	Moby-Dick,	the	other	very	surprising	thing	about
SIE	is	that	you	steer	readers	away	from	enlightenment	and	toward	the	state	you	call
Human	Adulthood.
	
Human	Adulthood	is	the	real	prize.	Anyone	who	is	involved	in	spiritual	pursuits	is
actually	pursuing	Human	Adulthood	but	probably	doesn’t	know	it.	The	point	I
wanted	to	make	is	that	Human	Adulthood	is	what	everyone	really	wants	and	not
many	people	really	have.	The	child	has	to	die	for	the	adult	to	be	born	and	this	very
seldom	 happens.	 It’s	 a	 cataclysmic,	 death/rebirth	 event.	 Once	 born	 into	 this
adulthood,	all	of	life	becomes	about	growth	and	discovery.	The	universe	is	the
playground	of	the	Human	Adult.	So	anyway,	that	was	a	major	theme	in	Incorrect
because	that’s	what	it’s	really	all	about.	Religion	and	spirituality	are	all	about	not
going	 anywhere.	 Enlightenment	 is	 all	 about	 going	 and	 never	 stopping.	 Human
Adulthood	is	all	about	wandering	and	exploring	and	playing.	It’s	about	living	life
and	fulfilling	potential	and	expanding	without	limits.	All	the	good	things	that	can	be
said	about	enlightenment	and	religion	and	spirituality	are	the	natural	qualities	of
Human	 Adulthood;	 manifestation	 of	 desires,	 flow	 and	 effortless	 functioning,
positive	emotions	that	are	not	fear-based	such	as	awe	and	gratitude	and	agape,
which	reflects	an	understanding	of	the	connectedness	of	things.	This	is	obviously
what	everyone	really	wants,	not	truth-realization,	so	that’s	what	I	tried	to	talk	about.
	
Q:
	You	must	have	an	intense	sense	of	satisfaction	at	having	created	such	superb
books,	but	the	real	reason	I	bring	it	up	is	that	I	suspect	you	don’t.
	
You’re	right,	I	don’t.	I	don’t	have	that	sort	of	relationship	to	the	books.	No	sense	of
pride	or	ownership,	no	self-congratulatory	feeling	of	accomplishment.	In	trying	to
answer	 this	 question	 I’m	 struggling	 just	 to	 think	 of	 what	 type	 of	 feeling	 or

=== Page 40 ===
attachment	an	author	might	have	for	his	works.	In	any	event,	the	books	are	fine,
that’s	all.	I	was	designed	to	write	them	and	I	did.	They’re	adequate.	I	am	satisfied
that	 I	 have	 done	 well	 and	 there’s	 nothing	 more	 to	 it.	 I	 have	 played	 my	 part
adequately.
	
Q:
	Adequately,	meaning	that	you	could	have	done	better?
	
Meaning	I	could	have	done	worse.	I’ve	been	pretty	good	about	allowing	the	process
to	work.	The	books	are	as	they	should	be.
	
Q:
	Are	you	totally	beyond	compliment	or	insult?
	
I	don’t	know	about	beyond,	that	might	be	misleading.	I	no	longer	possess	the	aspect
of	self	that	can	be	praised	or	insulted.	There	is	no	place	for	death	to	enter,	that	kind
of	thing.	I	don’t	think	of	myself	as	a	writer	or	teacher	or	anything	else.	I	just	did
what	was	indicated.	If	it	remains	indicated,	I’ll	do	it	some	more.	If	not,	I	won’t.	I
really	wouldn’t	mind	just	being	done	with	the	whole	spirituality	thing.	It	bears
repeating	that	I’m	not	a	spiritual	person.	If	it	weren’t	for	the	writing	I’d	have	no
further	connection	to	it	at	all.
	
Q:
	It’s	strange	to	think	of	a	spiritual	master,	teacher	and	author	as	being	unspiritual
or	aspiritual.	It	must	be	strange	for	you	to	write	for	this	audience.
	
Sure,	now	extend	that	a	bit	and	imagine	my	situation	in	trying	to	continue	to
perform	this	communicator	role.	The	fact	is	that	I	have	almost	no	memory	of	the
pre-awakened	state.	This	isn’t	a	fuzzy	feeling-level	sort	of	thing,	it’s	a	quite	specific
and	pronounced	gap	between	my	paradigm	and	the	unawakened	paradigm,	and	it
keeps	getting	wider	as	my	memories	of	my	own	life	in	the	other	paradigm	fade.
	
Q:
	That	must	be	very	challenging.
	
Only	where	ego	is	concerned.	It	wouldn’t	matter	to	me	at	all	except	for	the	writing.
To	write	books	I	have	to	speak	across	that	chasm	and	it’s	getting	impossibly	wide.
	
Q:
	So	it	makes	writing	the	books	a	challenge	because—
	
Because	empathy	is	nearly	gone.	I	have	practically	no	memory	of	what	it	means	to
believe	 anything.	 Most	 people	 reading	 this	 would	 probably	 see	 someone	 who
believes	in	televangelist	faith	healers	and	supermarket	tabloids	the	same	way	that	I
see	everyone.	From	my	perspective,	all	beliefs	are	nonsensical.	I	can	no	longer	draw

=== Page 41 ===
any	 real	 distinction	 between	 the	 merits	 of	 one	 and	 another.	 They’re	 all	 equal
because	they’re	all	untrue.	People	reading	this	probably	look	at	people	who	send
their	retirement	money	to	TV	preachers	and	wonder	how	they	can	be	so	gullible,
but	from	my	perspective,	everyone	is	that	gullible.	I	no	longer	see	any	difference
between	any	two	people’s	beliefs;	I	no	longer	can.	There	is	no	better	or	worse
belief,	no	more	or	less	true.	They’re	all	dreamstate	apparitions	that	have	no	reality
or	solidity	outside	of	the	dream.	I	can	make	out	no	distinction	other	than	that.	And
yet,	I	seem	to	have	this	task	of	trying	to	communicate	across	this	ever-widening
divide,	to	connect	with	minds	that	don’t	see	this	gulf	or	really	believe	it’s	there.
That’s	the	thing	that’s	happening;	the	gulf	is	getting	wider.	The	idea	that	the	Holy
Roman	Church	is	somehow	better	or	truer	or	more	valid	than	a	suicide	cult	is	lost
on	 me.	 I	 am	 no	 longer	 capable	 of	 perceiving	 or	 pretending	 to	 perceive	 such
distinctions.	I	know	that	one	has	more	adherents	than	the	other	but	that	doesn’t
mean	anything.	From	my	perspective,	a	person	is	either	in	the	process	of	waking	up
or	they’re	not.	That’s	the	only	distinction	I	see	clearly	anymore.	One	is	either
confronting	reality	or	denying	it.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	A	lot	of	people	who	have	met	you	through	the	books	are	eager	to	meet	you	in
person.	We’ve	seen	some	pretty	interesting	offers	of	what	people	would	give	or	do
to	be	with	you,	even	for	a	short	while.
	
That’s	not	indicated.
	
Q:
	You	sound	like	a	robot	at	times.
	
Even	to	myself,	but	the	fact	remains	that	I	am	designed	to	do	what	I’ve	done,	write,
but	I	am	not	designed	to	fulfill	a	public	role.
	
Q:
	Designed?
	
Designed,	destined,	dharmically-inclined,	whatever.	I	enjoy	writing,	but	I	don’t
enjoy	people,	which	is	to	say,	ego.	This	aversion	to	ego	seems	perfectly	normal	to
me.	I	don’t	think	it’s	at	all	strange,	so	it’s	not	likely	to	change.	In	fact,	I’d	encourage
everyone	 to	 develop	 a	 similar	 aversion.	 There’s	 only	 one	 false,	 petty,	 fearful,
dishonest	thing	in	the	universe	and	it’s	ego;	the	false	self.	I	think	anyone	who	really
comes	to	know	it	will	come	to	be	repulsed	by	it	and	that’s	certainly	moving	in	the
direction	of	waking	up.
	

=== Page 42 ===
In	any	case,	I’m	a	private	person	and	I	have	nothing	to	say	that	isn’t	in	the	books.	I
made	that	point	in	this	book.	There’s	simply	not	that	much	to	say	and	I’ve	said	it	all.
I	can	continue	to	write,	to	expand	on	themes,	go	deeper	into	some	topics,	but	that’s
about	it.	Anyone	who	wants	to	track	me	down,	ask	me	questions,	benefit	from
whatever	 they	 think	 I	 can	 offer,	 is	 operating	 purely	 from	 denial.	 It’s	 easy	 to
convince	 yourself	 otherwise,	 that	 seeking	 out	 a	 direct	 relationship	 with	 some
whoop-de-doo	spiritual	fella	is	the	mark	of	deep	commitment,	but	it’s	Maya	who’s
doing	 the	 convincing.	 What	 would	 I	 possibly	 have	 to	 say	 to	 someone?	 We’ve
already	determined	to	a	reasonable	certainty	that	there	are	no	valid	questions	left
unanswered	by	the	books,	so	what	would	I	do,	cite	page	numbers?	If	someone
comes	up	to	me	now	seeking	whatever,	all	I	could	tell	them	is,	“Maya	sent	you.	It’s
her	hand	up	your	ass,	turning	your	head,	moving	your	lips.	You	have	serious	work
to	do	and	the	only	reason	you	came	here	was	to	avoid	it.”
	
If	people	don’t	want	to	be	serious	about	this	they	don’t	have	to	be,	that’s	entirely
their	business,	but	from	the	very	outset	of	this	publishing	project	I	was	determined
that	I	would	not	allow	myself	to	be	drawn	into	people’s	avoidance	games.	Everyone
wants	to	talk	about	it,	but	there’s	nothing	to	say.	It’s	easy	to	take	a	trip,	pay	some
money,	give	up	some	comforts,	prostrate	yourself	at	someone’s	feet,	obey,	adore,
exalt,	whatever,	and	think	that	translates	into	something	positive,	some	sort	of
forward	motion,	but	these	are	all	the	acts	of	an	ego	seeking	to	divert	attention	away
from	the	real	issue	with	busywork	and	empty	gestures;	false	acts	of	surrender
allowing	us	to	convince	ourselves	that	we’re	striding	boldly	into	the	light	while
staying	safely	huddled	in	shadow.	No	one	needs	me	for	that.	Anyone	with	a	genuine
desire	to	face	the	issue	of	self	already	has	all	I	can	offer.	Use	the	process	of	Spiritual
Autolysis	and	try	to	figure	out	what’s	true.	Everything	else	is	about	being	turned
away.
	
Q:
	You	make	it	sound	so	simple,	but	in	reality	it’s	the	most	difficult	thing	anyone
can	ever	do.
	
Well,	there’s	the	critical	point.	It’s	not	a	matter	of	awakening,	it’s	a	matter	of	getting
to	the	First	Step.	Once	you’ve	taken	the	First	Step,	everything	else	follows	from
there.	Until	you’ve	taken	the	First	Step,	it’s	all	academic.	The	First	Step	is	the	true
starting	point	of	this	whole	process.	Everything	else	is	about	taking	or	not	taking	the
First	Step.	To	get	to	the	First	Step,	to	cross	that	starting	line,	you	have	to	cultivate
an	understanding	and	appreciation	of	the	forces	you’re	up	against;	of	Maya,	of	ego,
of	 the	 nature	 of	 self-delusion,	 of	 fear,	 or	 else	 no	 amount	 of	 dedication	 or
commitment	will	avail	in	the	least.	If	you’re	all	mind	and	no	heart	you	can	only	run
in	circles.	If	you’re	all	heart	and	no	mind	you	can	only	dig	yourself	into	a	deeper

=== Page 43 ===
hole.	Until	you	cross	the	real	starting	line,	take	the	First	Step,	it’s	all	just	a	hobby
like	golf	or	stamp	collecting.	Spirituality	itself	is	just	another	tool	of	denial,	the
most	effective	of	them	all,	and	that’s	why	the	search	for	truth	is	the	greatest	failure
in	the	history	of	man.
	
Here’s	a	simple	test.	If	it’s	soothing	or	comforting,	if	it	makes	you	feel	warm	and
fuzzy;	if	it’s	about	getting	into	pleasant	emotional	or	mental	states;	if	it’s	about
peace,	love,	tranquility,	silence	or	bliss;	if	it’s	about	a	brighter	future	or	a	better
tomorrow;	if	it	makes	you	feel	good	about	yourself	or	boosts	your	self-esteem,	tells
you	you’re	okay,	tells	you	everything’s	just	fine	the	way	it	is;	if	it	offers	to	improve,
benefit	or	elevate	you,	or	if	it	suggests	that	someone	else	is	better	or	above	you;	if
it’s	about	belief	or	faith	or	worship;	if	it	raises	or	alters	consciousness;	if	it	combats
stress	 or	 deepens	 relaxation,	 or	 if	 it’s	 therapeutic	 or	 healing,	 or	 if	 it	 promises
happiness	or	relief	from	unhappiness,	if	it’s	about	any	of	these	or	similar	things,
then	it’s	not	about	waking	up.	Then	it’s	about	living	in	the	dreamstate,	not	smashing
out	of	it.
	
On	the	other	hand,	if	it	feels	like	you’re	being	skinned	alive,	if	it	feels	like	a
prolonged	evisceration,	if	you	feel	your	identity	unraveling,	if	it	twists	you	up
physically	and	drains	your	health	and	derails	your	life,	if	you	feel	love	dying	inside
you,	 if	 it	 seems	 like	 death	 would	 be	 better,	 then	 it’s	 probably	 the	 process	 of
awakening.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
