# Zen and the Art of Self-Mutilation

Zen	and	the	Art	of	Self-Mutilation
	
This	 is	 adapted	 from	 a	 letter	 Jed	 McKenna	 wrote	 in	 reply	 to	 a	 self-professed
“serious	seeker”	who	made	an	impassioned	offer	to	turn	over	his	belongings	and
himself	in	exchange	for	being	accepted	as	Jed’s	student.
	
	
Dear	William,
	
You	don’t	need	to	add	me	to	your	equation,	you	need	to	subtract	yourself.	Begin	by
re-examining	 your	 assumptions.	 It’s	 clear	 from	 your	 letter	 that	 you	 consider
yourself	a	serious	person,	a	serious	seeker.	That’s	the	first	assumption	you’ll	want	to
challenge.	You’re	sure	that	a	serious	seeker	is	what	you	are	and	you	think	I	see	you

=== Page 44 ===
that	way	too,	but	this	is	not	the	case.	I	know	serious	when	I	see	it	and	I	know	a
handpuppet	of	Maya	when	I	see	it.	You	think	you’re	on	top	of	something,	but	the
only	thing	to	be	on	top	of	is	Maya,	and	she’s	on	top	of	you	like	a	house	on	a	mouse.
	
I	receive	many	offers	from	people	who	want	to	come	be	with	me.	Maybe	anyone
perceived	as	a	spiritual	solution-provider	receives	this	kind	of	offer,	I	wouldn’t
know.	People	want	to	give	up	everything;	their	stuff,	their	money,	their	very	lives,
really.	They	don’t	know	what	to	do	with	them	so	I	guess	they	figure,	why	not	dump
them	on	someone	who	seems	more	qualified,	like	a	mother	leaving	her	baby	on	the
rich	man’s	doorstep.	This	may	appear	to	be	the	ultimate	sacrifice,	a	grand	act	of
selflessness,	 but	 it’s	 really	 the	 ultimate	 entrenchment;	 fear	 gone	 haywire,	 ego
solidifying	its	hold	for	decades	to	come.	This	isn’t	how	you	surrender	the	self,	this
is	how	you	abandon	it;	abdicate	responsibility	for	your	own	life.	I	understand	this
can	be	a	very	tempting	response	to	a	very	perplexing	challenge.
	
Nevertheless,	your	gesture	suggests	that	you’re	in	an	uncomfortable	place.	Good	for
you.	That’s	always	the	best	place	to	be.	Being	so	uncomfortable	means	you’ll	soon
have	 to	 move.	 That’s	 good.	 That’s	 the	 motivation	 that	 drives	 the	 journey	 of
awakening.	It’s	a	series	of	steps,	none	taken	voluntarily,	all	necessitated	by	the	kind
of	discomfort	that	caused	you	to	write	your	letter	to	me.	The	motivation	behind
your	letter	is	good,	but	throwing	yourself	at	me	is	not	a	solution.	What	would	I	do
with	you?	What	possible	instruction	could	I	give?
	
Maybe	I	would	tell	you	to	cut	off	one	ounce	of	your	body	every	day	until	you	can
answer	the	question,	“What	is	true?”	Any	ounce	as	long	as	it’s	an	ounce.	That
should	bring	you	quickly	into	focus;	light	a	fire	under	you.	If	you	had	to	do	this,	cut
off	an	ounce	of	your	body	every	day,	how	much	time	do	you	think	you	would	waste
on	meditation?	On	attending	satsang	or	reading	the	latest	spiritual	bestseller?	Not
bloody	much.	You	would	soon	become	an	enlightenment	machine.	Sleep	and	food
would	be	reduced	to	barest	minimums.	Relationships	and	activities	once	deemed
essential	would	be	forgotten.	You	would	enter	into	a	burning	mania	of	single-
pointedness.	Soon,	anything	other	than	the	question	What	is	true?	would	seem
comically	irrelevant.	There’s	your	new-Zen;	Zen	for	the	new	millennium.	It	would
be	interesting	to	see	how	many	sand	gardens	and	books	of	pithy	aphorisms	the	self-
mutilation	approach	sells.
	
What	is	true?	That’s	the	only	koan	there	is;	the	only	one	anyone	ever	needs.	Every
day	you	don’t	answer	this	question,	another	ounce.	Take	a	moment	to	think	about
what	it	would	mean	to	have	to	sit	down	with	a	scalpel	at	a	certain	time	every	day
and	amputate	an	ounce	of	your	body.	You	would	quickly	have	to	learn	things	about

=== Page 45 ===
asking	and	answering,	about	how	the	process	works	and	doesn’t	work,	about	how	to
help	it	and	how	to	get	out	of	its	way.	You	would	have	to	learn	how	to	unlearn,	and
you	would	need	access	to	a	tremendous	amount	of	resources	in	order	to	accomplish
such	an	unlearning.	You	would	discard	clever	spiritual	concepts	for	cold	facts,
pretty	Eastern	vocabulary	for	words	of	scientific	precision.	The	process	is	one	of
seeing	clearly,	not	just	blindly	lashing	out.	That	act	of	seeing	clearly	takes	time	and
resources	and	the	mind	must	work	almost	ceaselessly	at	levels	far	beyond	the
everyday.
	
Would	this	work?	Well,	let’s	say	it	did.	Say	it	worked	in	500	days.	There	you	are
after	hacking	off	over	30	pounds	of	yourself,	and	now	you’re	truth-realized.	Now
you	know	directly,	for	yourself,	without	the	slightest	possibility	of	error,	the	truth.
You	are	free	from	delusion;	awakened	from	the	dreamstate.	You	have	joined	the
ranks	of	the	spiritually	enlightened.	You	look	at	your	toeless	feet,	fingerless	hands,
noseless	face,	earless	head,	and	what	would	you	say?	Here’s	what	you’d	say:
	
“Well,	uh,	that	was	kinda	dumb.”
	
I’m	happy	to	tell	you	that	right	up	front.	Waking	up	is	kinda	dumb.	There’s	no
point.	It’s	not	merely	pointless,	it’s	pointlessness.	Who	would	do	such	a	thing?	Only
someone	who	absolutely	couldn’t	not	do	it.	Once	you	become	the	person	who	can’t
not	do	it,	it’s	a	whole	different	thing,	but	trying	to	do	it	before	you	absolutely	must
is	as	ludicrous	as	slicing	off	parts	of	your	body.	(Which,	by	the	way,	don’t	do.)
	
As	barbaric	and	unthinkable	as	this	ounce-a-day	approach	may	seem,	I	can	assure
you	that	anyone	who	has	ever	managed	to	awaken	from	the	dreamstate	was	driven
by	equally	unendurable	mental	and	emotional	forces,	something	to	consider	the	next
time	you	hear	the	pop	guru	de	jour	recount	the	moment	of	his	glorious	epiphany:	“I
was	walking	in	the	park,	children	were	laughing,	birds	were	singing,	when	all	of	a
sudden...”
	
This	is	where	the	process	of	Spiritual	Autolysis	comes	in.	Spiritual	Autolysis	is
ultimately	about	clear	seeing;	clearly	seeing	what	is,	which	is	what	we	do	when	we
stop	seeing	what’s	not.	We	can	use	SA	to	raise	the	ordinary	powers	of	the	mind	up
to	the	extraordinary	levels	necessary	in	order	to	see	life	and	the	world	and	ourselves
as	they	truly	are.	Many	people	can	build	nuclear	reactors,	compose	symphonies,
conquer	nations	or	perform	brain	surgery,	but	very	few	can	see	what	is.
	
You	mention	in	your	letter	that	Alan	Watts	said	that	we	are	the	apertures	through
which	the	universe	sees	and	experiences	itself.	It	might	be	more	useful	to	say	we	are

=== Page 46 ===
the	imperfect	lenses	through	which	the	universe,	or	the	I-universe,	observes	itself;
through	which	the	undifferentiated	creates	the	illusion	of	differentiation.	It’s	an
amusing	 idea	 to	 play	 with.	 Self	 is	 distortion:	 distortion	 by	 design.	 The	 exact
distortion	of	the	lens	is	what	makes	the	exact	individual;	distortion	itself	is	self.	All
personal	attributes,	understood	this	way,	are	flaws;	imperfections	in	a	lens	that
exists	 to	 be	 imperfect.	 Imperfection	 does	 not	 otherwise	 exist,	 so	 an	 artificial
imperfection	is	created;	ego.	Seekers	may	strive	to	become	a	perfect	lens	but,	of
course,	the	perfect	lens	is	no-lens;	no	imperfections,	no	lens,	just	what	is.	Your
imperfections	are	not	only	who	and	what	you	are,	but	why	you	are.	The	finiteness
and	the	imperfection	of	the	lens	are	the	reasons	for	the	lens.	No-lens	means	the
universe	goes	unbeheld,	so	what	has	been	accomplished	by	this	act?	Who	is	served?
Who	benefits?	This	reinforces	my	earlier	statement	that	awakening	is	pointless—
trading	segregated	self	for	integrated	no-self,	finite	being	for	infinite	non-being—all
this	by	way	of	saying	not	that	perfection	is	unattainable,	but	that	it’s	unavoidable.
Perfection	is.	It	is	what	is.	There	is	no	other.	In	truth,	there	is	no	such	thing	as	non-
perfect	or	imperfect.	The	point	of	finite	and	imperfect	lenses	is	to	create	artificial
realms	of	finiteness	and	imperfection	in	which	to	play.
	
(The	original	letter	cites	an	Indian	saint	to	bolster	an	argument	and	then	proceeds
as	if	the	words	of	the	sage	were	accepted	fact.)
	
Don’t	come	at	me	brandishing	dead	guys	like	potent	allies.	It	doesn’t	help	you.
They	can’t	put	up	a	fight.	If	you	can’t	make	the	argument,	you	can’t	summon	the
dead	to	make	it	for	you.	That’s	a	logical	fallacy	called	Ipse	Dixit:	“He	himself	said
it.”	In	law,	it’s	called	the	dead	man’s	statute	and	it’s	inadmissible.	You	can’t	elect	a
ghost	proxy.	You’re	borrowing	authority	from	someone	who	is	incontestable	not	by
merit,	but	by	death.	Your	argument	is	unassailable	because	the	person	making	it	is
unavailable.	You’re	saying	that	if	he	were	here,	he	could	make	the	argument,	but
he’s	not	here.	You	can	borrow	words	and	ideas	and	quotations	from	the	terminally
absent	to	help	illustrate	a	point,	but	if	it’s	your	point,	it’s	your	problem;	your
argument	to	make.
	
In	any	case,	if	he	were	here,	he	couldn’t	make	the	argument.	I’m	familiar	with	the
beloved	teacher	of	whom	you	speak.	I	promise	you	that	if	he	were	here	I	could	slice
him	 into	 a	 garnish	 while	 rubbing	 my	 tummy	 and	 patting	 my	 head.	 No	 effort
required.	No	contest.	You	could	do	the	same	by	this	time	tomorrow	if	you’d	stop
being	lazy	and	start	thinking	for	yourself.
	
Your	spirituality	is	just	another	false	garment,	another	layer	of	the	lie	of	self.	Your
spirituality	defines	the	dimensions	of	your	cell	and	the	fact	that	you	don’t	see	that

=== Page 47 ===
tells	me	that	you	have	no	idea	where	you	are	or	whose	rules	you	are	living	under.
You	have	no	grasp	of	your	true	situation,	of	the	nature	of	your	captive	status.	You’re
clinging	 desperately	 to	 your	 lies;	 shielding	 them	 with	 emotional	 energy.	 Why?
Because	these	lies	are	you.	They	are	who	you	are.	You	don’t	have	imperfections,
you	are	imperfections.	Ask	yourself	why	you	even	write	to	me?	What’s	the	point?
None	of	what	I’m	saying	is	new	to	you.	And	yet	here	you	are,	writing	impassioned
letters	to	me,	trying	to	stand	your	lies	back	up	on	their	feet.	If	you	like	your	lies,
fine,	but	you’re	not	going	to	make	them	true	through	the	power	of	your	conviction.
Who	you	are	is	a	lie;	that’s	a	fact.	You’re	a	fictional	character	in	a	state	of	wondrous
denial.	What	you	think	of	as	your	uniqueness	is	really	nothing	more	than	a	series	of
randomly	set	toggle	switches,	and	the	particular	settings	you	call	“me”	amount	to
nothing	 more	 special	 than	 the	 distinctions	 between	 any	 two	 snowflakes	 in	 an
endless	blizzard.
	
A	serious	person	must	remember	at	all	times	where	he	is	and	who’s	running	the
show.	This	is	Maya’s	house.	She	controls	everything.	She	has	every	advantage.	We
are	patients	in	Maya’s	asylum,	and	all	instruction	to	sit	still	and	quiet	the	mind	come
directly	from	her.	Stillness	and	silence	are	the	antithesis	of	the	awakening	process,
and	those	who	advocate	peace	and	compassion	and	a	quiet	mind	are	just	reselling
their	preferred	sleep	potions.	There	are	even	popular	spiritual	teachers	and	authors
who	advocate	doing	nothing	at	all;	they	say	that	effort	itself	is	the	problem,	that	the
discontentment	that	drives	the	spiritual	pursuit	is	the	only	thing	standing	between
ourselves	and	the	goal	of	that	pursuit.	Is	it	any	wonder	that	such	a	message	would
be	popular?	Is	there	any	doubt	from	whom	such	a	message	really	comes?	You
indicate	in	your	letter	that	you	believe	a	teacher’s	lineage	is	important,	so	there’s	the
one	true	lineage;	Maya.	If	you	wish	to	understand	any	spiritual	teacher’s	lineage,
you	need	only	imagine	him	dangling	from	marionette	lines	of	which	he	is	unaware,
spouting	off	about	free	will,	the	hand	of	Maya	above,	controlling	everything.
	
Even	as	you	write	to	me	and	I	write	to	you,	we	are	dissolving	in	a	vat	of	a	corrosive
chemical	called	oxygen.	We	are	genetically	programmed	to	self-destruct.	Our	lives
are	being	swallowed	by	time	and	every	inhalation	may	be	the	last.	The	inescapable
fact	is	that	we	are	all	practitioners	of	the	New	Zen	I	described	above.	Every	day	we
lose	an	ounce	or	a	gram	or	a	pound	and	someday,	poof!,	gone	as	if	we	never	were.
	
There’s	only	one	koan	and	it’s	the	same	for	all	of	us:
	
What	is	true?
	
Yours,	&tc

=== Page 48 ===
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
