# Mannahatta

Mannahatta
	
	
I	like	Manhattan
	too	much	to	ever	live	there.	The	most	I	ever	do	is	visit	for	a	few
months.	That’s	what	I’m	doing	now.	The	time	is	summer	‘01.	The	Twin	Towers	still
stand,	but	not	for	long.	The	first	book,	Spiritual	Enlightenment:	The	Damnedest
Thing,	is	written	but	not	yet	printed.
	
I’d	spent	the	last	few	months	house	and	dog	sitting	in	Puerto	Rico.	When	I	decided
to	go	to	the	city,	I	called	my	sister	who	lives	there	and	set	up	a	lunch.	As	it
happened,	she	said,	she	knew	of	a	three	month	availability	on	a	Tribeca	loft	if	I
needed	a	place.	She	told	me	that	her	friends	who	owned	it	were	desperate	to	find	a
tenant	because	their	arrangements	through	a	house-swapping	agency	had	fallen
through	at	the	last	minute,	but	they	were	going	on	their	trip	anyway.
	
“That’s	fine,”	I	told	her.	“I’ll	call	Rodney	and	ask	him	to	put	it	together.”
	
“You	don’t	want	to	see	it	first?”	she	asks.
	
“You’re	saying	it’s	okay,	right?”
	
“Yes,	but—”
	
“So	it’s	fine.	I’ll	see	you	for	lunch	next	week.”
	
That’s	a	clear	illustration	of	two	widely	disparate	modes	of	operating	in	the	world;
the	distrusting	way	of	the	segregated	self	and	the	trusting	way	of	the	integrated	self.
My	sister	would	have	had	to	inspect	the	apartment,	haggle	about	price,	maybe	call
in	experts	to	inspect	this	and	that,	find	alternatives	to	keep	her	options	open,	put

=== Page 49 ===
deposits	in	escrow	and	get	a	lawyer	to	sign	off	on	the	lease.	She	might	refer	to	the
owners	as	friends	but,	as	she	would	say,	business	is	business.	This	is	the	falsest	of
economies	because	the	only	thing	she’s	saving	is	money,	while	wasting	her	only
true	 wealth,	 her	 lifeforce,	 with	 all	 that	 dreadful	 fear-based	 strategizing	 and
maneuvering.	It’s	not	really	about	money,	of	course,	it’s	about	self-image.
	
That’s	not	just	how	she’d	lease	an	apartment,	that’s	how	she	does	pretty	much
everything.	She	lives	in	a	universe	where	a	hundred	bad	things	could	happen	in
every	situation.	Her	state	is	one	of	constant	vigilance.	She	spends	her	life	imagining
everything	that	could	go	wrong	and	making	sure	that	it	doesn’t.	To	her,	the	universe
is	a	hostile	place	in	which,	though	she’d	never	phrase	it	this	way,	she	does	not
belong	and	has	no	rights	or	power.	And	yet,	most	anyone	would	consider	my	sister
a	bright,	attractive	and	very	successful	woman.	What	I’ve	just	said	about	her	is	just
as	true	of	many	other	people	and	more	so	of	most.	This	mode	of	operation	appears
like	a	systemic	malignancy	to	me—cancer	of	the	life—but	probably	seems	normal
and	acceptable	to	most	people.	It’s	not	a	starkly	pronounced	fear,	it’s	more	a	damp
sort	of	dread	that	seeps	outward	from	the	center	into	every	corner	of	one’s	being.
When	you’re	living	with	it,	it	just	seems	normal.	Once	free	of	it,	you	can’t	believe
you	ever	lived	like	that.
	
To	me,	it’s	the	simplest	thing	in	the	world.	I’m	going	to	the	city	so	I	pick	up	a	phone
and	find	a	place	to	stay	before	I	even	thought	about	finding	a	place	to	stay.	I	get
what	I	want	before	I	know	I	want	it,	and	better	than	I	would	have	thought	to	want.	I
never	take	this	sort	of	effortless	functioning	for	granted	and	I’m	permeated	with
deep	and	genuine	gratitude	many	times	a	day.	I’ve	arrived	at	this	place	of	smooth
flow	mainly	by	being	respectful,	by	watching	how	things	work,	and	by	keeping	my
fearful	little	reptile	brain	out	of	the	equation.	I	don’t	have	much	in	the	way	of
distorting	mental	or	emotional	baggage	that	I	haul	around	with	me,	so	I	guess	that
allows	everything	to	work	as	it’s	supposed	to;	smooth	and	easy.
	
Does	all	this	make	me	a	sucker?	A	soft	touch?	Not	really.	Should	the	deal	go	bad,	or
the	lessors	try	to	hold	my	deposits	unjustly,	or	any	of	the	many	things	that	can	go
wrong	in	this	type	of	arrangement	do	go	wrong,	then	I’d	just	make	another	phone
call.	I’d	set	a	pitbull	lawyer	on	them	with	instructions	to	cause	regret.	Or	maybe	I’d
just	shrug	and	blow	it	off.	I	never	know	how	I’ll	act	until	I	do	because	I	don’t	have
any	rules	or	guidelines	that	tell	me	how	to	behave,	or	maybe	just	one:	Patience.
Breathe.	Give	it	time.	Allow	things	to	settle	out	and	for	patterns	to	become	clear.
	
The	point	I’m	trying	to	make	is	that	I’m	not	necessarily	a	sweetheart	of	a	guy.	I
could	be	a	total	prick,	at	least	in	theory,	but	I	must	say,	there	doesn’t	seem	to	be

=== Page 50 ===
much	call	for	it.	I	don’t	think	about	things	like	this—deals	going	sour,	people
betraying	 people,	 pitbull	 lawyers—and	 they	 really	 never	 occur	 in	 my	 reality.
There’d	be	no	point	because	there’s	nothing	in	it	for	me	to	learn.	So	when	I	make	a
call	and	my	sister	tells	me	she	knows	of	a	place,	I	already	know	all	about	it.	I	know
it	will	be	ideal,	that	the	owners	will	be	easy	to	deal	with,	that	it	will	be	in	a	better
area	than	I	would	have	chosen,	and	that	all	sorts	of	other	good	things	will	come	of
it,	not	because	I	orchestrated	it	with	my	snazzy	little	brain,	but	because	I	didn’t.
And	if	it	appears	to	line	up	nicely	and	then	falls	through,	then	I	won’t	suspect	that
something	didn’t	work,	but	that	something	bigger	and	better	is	at	work.
	
I	have	no	rule	that	makes	me	a	nice	guy.	I	have	no	rules.	Rules	are	a	way	we	have	of
defining	ourselves,	of	drawing	imaginary	boundaries.	Such	boundaries	are	artificial
and	easily	erased.	Our	most	strongly	held	convictions	can	be	wiped	away	like	a
layer	of	make-up	through	a	moment	of	transcendence	or	cataclysm,	or	merely	by	a
slight	shift	in	brain	chemistry.	Morals,	ethics,	I	have	none.	As	it	happens,	I’m	a	nice
guy.	 If	 it	 happens	 another	 way,	 I’ll	 be	 another	 kind	 of	 guy.	 I	 could	 make	 the
impassioned	assertion	that	I’d	never,	under	any	circumstances,	cause	anyone	harm,
but	events	might	change	and	for	some	reason	I’ll	have	to	push	some	kids	in	front	of
a	train	this	afternoon.	I	doubt	it	and	I	hope	not,	but	maybe.	Yes,	it’s	unimaginable,
but	that	doesn’t	make	it	impossible.	Unimaginable	stuff	happens	all	the	time.
	
I	have	a	way	of	operating	in	the	world	and	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	rules;	not	mine
or	anyone	else’s.	It	has	to	do	with	trust	and	patterns	and	the	absence	of	artificial
boundaries.	If	those	poor	little	children	need	to	be	pushed	in	front	of	that	speeding
locomotive,	and	that	fact	becomes	clear	to	me	in	the	way	that	things	becomes	clear
to	me,	then	we’re	gonna	need	a	clean-up	crew	with	strong	stomachs	and	a	lot	of
little	bags.
	
You’d	think	that	I	could	say	with	certainty	that	nothing	so	terrible	could	ever	come
to	pass,	and	I’d	certainly	bet	heavily	against	it,	but	it’s	not	a	sure	thing.	Terrible
things	do	come	to	pass.	An	objective	observer	of	humanity	might	say	that	terrible
things	 are	 closer	 to	 the	 norm	 than	 big,	 happy	 things.	 Why	 pretend	 otherwise?
Suffering	and	horror	are	part	of	life	in	the	dreamstate,	a	big	part.	No,	I	don’t	really
think	that	the	universe	will	have	me	push	children	in	front	of	a	train	this	afternoon.
That	lets	me	off	the	hook,	but	not	the	children.	The	universe	probably	won’t	use	my
hands	for	it,	but	it	will	still	push	those	children	in	front	of	that	train.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	

=== Page 51 ===
I	wouldn’t	suggest	that	just	anyone	can	attain	to	supreme	mastery	in	the	art	and
science	of	manifesting	desires—I	know	I	haven’t—but	I	would	suggest	that	most
anyone,	 whatever	 their	 circumstances,	 has	 plenty	 of	 room	 for	 improvement.	 I
understand	that	there	are	influencing	factors;	gender,	race,	place,	wealth,	health,
karma,	dharma,	luck	and	others	that	can	play	a	crucial	role	in	the	degree	to	which
any	individual	might	realistically	hope	to	elevate,	redefine,	or	undefine	themselves,
but	I	also	understand	that	most	people	are	carrying	around	a	lot	of	crappy	crap	they
don’t	need	and	which	serves	only	to	limit	their	potential	for	expansion.
	
Some	people	dabble	with	this	sort	of	wishcraft	and	reject	it	when	it	doesn’t	work	for
them.	They	wish	for	a	million	dollars	or	something	equally	juvenile,	and	when	it
doesn’t	appear	they	write	the	whole	subject	off	as,	well,	wishful	thinking.	There’s
right-wanting	and	there’s	fear-wanting	and	a	million	dollars	is	fear-wanting.	Right-
wanting	is	genuine	and	represents	a	true	unfolding	of	one’s	unique	pattern.	This	is
no	 small	 point.	 Discovering	 right-wanting	 within	 yourself	 is	 the	 journey	 of
unbecoming	who	you	aren’t.
	
Another	point	I	have	to	make	before	I	move	on	is	that	nothing	I	talk	about,	whether
it’s	truth-realization	or	our	true	relationship	with	the	universe,	is	anything	other	than
that	which	is	naturally,	rightfully,	immutably	ours.	This	isn’t	stuff	we	have	to	go	out
and	learn	or	earn	or	fight	for,	it’s	simply	what	is.	The	Zen	master	who	wrote	as	his
own	epitaph,	“All	my	life	I	have	sold	water	by	the	river.	Ha!	What	a	joke!”	was
addressing	exactly	this	point.	This	is	natural.	This	is	what	is.	Reality	is	beyond	our
wildest	dreams	and	it	can	all	be	yours	because	it	already	is.	The	only	thing	in	the
way	is	you.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
So	I	took	the	apartment	for	three	months	with	the	intention	of	wallowing	in	high
culture	 for	 awhile;	 theater,	 museums,	 libraries,	 good	 restaurants.	 I’m	 very
comfortable	doing	all	these	things	alone.	It	wasn’t	actually	working	out	as	planned,
but	other,	better	things	were	working	out	very	nicely	so	I	was	happy	enough.	This
was	 a	 few	 months	 before	 the	 World	 Trade	 Center	 was	 attacked,	 so	 pre-9-11
normalcy	still	existed.	The	apartment	was	actually	a	renovated	warehouse	space;
lots	of	sand-blasted	brick,	rusty	iron	and	big	timber.	Very	large	and	airy	inside	with
walled	off	bedrooms	and	bathrooms	and	everything	else—kitchen,	dining	room,
formal	and	informal	living	areas—open.	A	circular	stairway	led	up	to	a	railed	upper
level	at	one	end	where	the	owners	kept	books	and	a	small	home	office.	Not	much	of
a	view	from	the	big	industrial	windows,	and	it	was	furnished	with	more	of	an	eye
toward	style	than	comfort	for	my	tastes,	but	still	a	very	nice	living	space.

=== Page 52 ===
	
Around	this	time	I	received	an	e-mail	from	Jolene	who	had	by	now	seen	herself
portrayed	in	a	pre-publication	copy	of	Damnedest.	She	wanted	to	see	me,	to	speak
with	me.	She	had	enough	money	saved	up	to	make	the	trip	and	wanted	to	come	for
a	few	days	even,	she	said,	if	she	could	only	spend	a	few	minutes	with	me.	I	replied
with	a	suggestion	that	she	buy	a	backpack	and	a	Eurail	Pass	and	go	spend	the
summer	bumming	around	Europe	instead.	She	liked	that	idea	and	said	she’d	try	to
do	it,	but	would	still	like	to	see	me	first.
	
I	agreed	and	after	a	few	e-mails	back	and	forth	her	plans	start	taking	shape.	A	week
or	so	before	her	visit	she	called	to	tell	me	her	flight	number	and	arrival	time,	but	she
hasn’t	found	a	place	to	stay	yet.	Without	thinking,	I	told	her	that	the	loft	has	plenty
of	room	and	she	should	stay	there	while	she’s	in	town.
	
“Really?”	she	said.	“Great!”
	
A	split	second	later	my	mind	caught	up	with	my	mouth.
	
“Hold	on	a	second,”	I	tell	her.	I	cover	the	mouthpiece	with	one	hand	and	rub	my
temple	in	a	slow,	circular,	what-the-fuck-did-I-just-do?	motion	with	the	other.
	
“I	have	to	speak	with	your	father,”	I	tell	her.	“Is	he	there?”
	
“Yeah,”	she	says	hesitantly.
	
“You’ve	been	upfront	about	this	trip?	Nothing	tricky?”
	
“No,	they	know	what	I’m	doing.”
	
“Okay,	put	your	father	on.”
	
“Okay,”	she	says	nervously,	“but	don’t	tell	him,	you	know,	don’t	tell	him	anything
important.”
	
“I	understand.	Put	him	on.”
	
After	a	few	moments	her	father	comes	on	the	line.	I	introduce	myself	and	we	speak
in	a	respectful	Mr.	Lastname	manner.	He	has	some	idea	of	who	I	am.	“Jo-Jo	talks
about	you	often	enough,	Mr.	McKenna,”	he	says,	not	sounding	very	pleased	about
it.	I	tell	him	that	I	thought	it	was	a	good	idea	for	him	and	me	to	speak	so	I	could

=== Page 53 ===
introduce	myself	and	assure	him	that	I’d	keep	an	eye	on	his	daughter	while	she	was
in	the	city.	I	was	painfully	aware	that	everything	I	said	sounded	wrong,	like	a	guilty
person	trying	to	sound	innocent,	but	there	was	no	help	for	it.
	
Of	course,	talking	to	her	father	was	not	strictly	necessary.	Jolene	was	old	enough	to
do	what	she	wanted,	but	that	wasn’t	the	point.	The	point	was	to	head	off	a	mess
before	it	became	one.	I	was	actually	somewhat	grateful	for	the	error	that	prompted
me	to	speak	with	him	though,	because	I	now	realized	it’s	something	I	should	have
done	anyway	and	hadn’t	thought	of.	He	seemed	somewhat	pleased	to	hear	from	me,
but	was	still	guarded.	Maybe	he	was	a	bit	relieved	to	find	that	this	character	who
had	 lured	 his	 daughter	 into	 some	 crazy	 cult	 thing	 sounded	 fairly	 sane	 and
responsible.	Just	a	guess.
	
“Jolene	and	I	were	speaking	just	now	and	I’m	afraid	I	made	a	bit	of	mistake.”
	
In	reply	he	just	hmph’d.
	
“I	offered	to	let	Jolene	stay	with	me	while	she’s	in	town.	I	have	plenty	of	room	here
and	it	seemed	like	the	safest	and	most	sensible	thing,	but,	of	course,	I	immediately
realized	it	might	look,	well,	a	bit	inappropriate.	I	thought	I	should	discuss	it	with
you.”
	
There	was	another	low	sound	from	the	other	end	of	the	phone,	but	I	wanted	to	finish
saying	my	part	before	he	started	on	his	so	I	plowed	on.	Of	course,	it	would	have
been	easier	to	simply	withdraw	the	initial	offer	but,	appearances	aside,	it’s	really
much	for	the	best	that	Jolene	stays	with	me	and,	after	a	moment’s	consideration,	I
realized	that	the	only	real	concern	appearance-wise	was	her	parents.	I	have	no
reputation	to	protect,	or	if	I	do	it	could	probably	use	some	spicing	up	anyway.
Jolene’s	reputation	should	be	safe	because	she’s	not	a	big-mouth	and	because	no
one	who	knows	her	would	believe	anything	raunchy	about	her	anyway.
	
“This	situation	is	exactly	what	I’m	sure	Jolene	has	told	you	it	is.	There’s	nothing,
uh,”	I	grope	for	a	word	and	end	up	using	a	dumb	one,	“romantic	in	all	this.	In	any
case,	I	shouldn’t	have	made	the	offer	and	I’ll	certainly	respect	whatever	your	wishes
might	be	on	the	matter.”	He	doesn’t	jump	in	so	I	continue,	wondering	how	I	got
myself	into	such	a	dimwitted	mess.	“I	could	help	her	find	a	hotel	or	a	nice	hostel,	or
maybe	she	could	be	accompanied	by	a	family	member	who	could	also	stay	in	my
place.	Whatever—”
	
Now	he	speaks.

=== Page 54 ===
	
“Are	you	asking	me—?”
	
I	cut	him	off.	I	know	exactly	what	he	means	because	that’s	how	this	whole	thing
sounds	to	me	too,	like	a	veiled	petition	to	court	his	daughter,	or	to	secure	his
blessing	for	something	weird.	I	roll	my	eyes	and	plod	on.
	
“I’m	just	telling	you	the	situation.	Whatever	you	say	is	how	it’ll	be.	I	made	this
offer	to	your	daughter	in	the	spirit	of	friendship	and	concern.	It’s	a	very	large
apartment	I	have	here	and	the	city	can	be	a	tricky	place.”
	
Dumb.	Just	plain	dumb	across	the	board.	But	that’s	the	situation	so	I	don’t	kick
myself	too	hard.	We	talk	a	bit	more.	He	gives	it	a	bit	of	thought	and	decides	I	sound
okay,	and	that	his	daughter	has	some	funny	ideas	but	she’s	a	good	kid,	and	if	we’re
going	to	do	anything	inappropriate	it	probably	wouldn’t	matter	what	he	thought	of
the	living	arrangements	anyway,	and	that	it	would	be	easier	for	him	and	his	wife	to
know	that	Jo-Jo	wouldn’t	be	completely	on	her	own	in	the	city.	My	sense	of	it,
though,	is	that	he	isn’t	so	much	concerned	about	these	housing	arrangements	as	he
is	of	the	larger	issue	of	his	daughter	becoming	a	stranger,	and	of	me	as	the	guy	who
might	have	caused	it.	He	thanks	me,	a	bit	halfheartedly,	and	we	leave	it	at	that.
	
Ack.
	
	
The	Journey	to	the	Shaman
	
I	could	have	met	her	at	the	airport,	or	I	could	have	sent	a	car	and	had	the	driver
waiting	for	her,	holding	up	a	sign	with	her	name.	That	probably	would	have	given
her	a	thrill.	The	thing	though,	and	this	is	an	important	thing,	is	that	the	journey	to
the	shaman	is	as	much	a	part	of	the	shamanic	experience	as	the	visit	with	him.	I’m
not	a	shaman,	of	course,	but	the	adage	fully	applies.	This	kid	has	gone	through
whatever	it	takes	a	young	farmgirl	from	the	cornbelt	to	track	me	down,	scrape	up
cash,	break	away	from	family	and	home,	and	get	on	a	plane	to	one	of	the	world’s
most	intimidating	urban	centers;	in	short,	to	embark	on	a	great	journey.	An	itch	in
her	head	must	have	grown	into	a	torment	to	necessitate	such	a	journey	and	I’m	not
about	to	diminish	that	by	hauling	her	up	the	last	few	feet.	My	part	starts	with
buzzing	her	in.
	
It’s	not	supposed	to	be	easy.
	

=== Page 55 ===
I	return	from	an	arthouse	showing	of	The	Winter	Guest	to	find	her	asleep,	using	her
backpack	as	a	pillow,	at	the	elevator	gate.	I	don’t	want	to	wake	her	and	I	can’t	go
past	her	without	making	a	racket,	but	I	also	don’t	want	to	stand	out	here	watching	a
string	of	saliva	trickle	down	the	zipper	of	a	side	pocket.	The	dilemma	resolves	itself
when	she	peeks	out	of	one	eye	and	then	the	other.
	
“Oh!	Hi!”	she	screeches	and	jumps	up	and	wipes	her	lips	and	wraps	me	in	a	hug,
“Hi,	hi,	hi,	hi,	hi!”
	
I	hi	back	and	break	away	and	ask	with	avuncular	concern	if	she	made	it	in	one
piece,	which	I	can	see	she	has.
	
We	get	her	settled	into	the	extra	bedroom.	I	give	her	the	spare	set	of	keys	and	we	go
for	a	walk	around	the	neighborhood.	We	find	a	nice	Mediterranean	place	for	dinner
and	discuss	her	plans	over	olives,	feta,	lamb	and	rice.	We	don’t	get	into	anything
she	refers	to	as	important.	There’ll	be	time	for	that	and	she	has	other	things	she
wants	to	do	while	she’s	here,	which	we	also	don’t	get	into	too	much,	but	I	can	tell
she’s	going	to	do	some	looking	around.	She’s	happy	and	upbeat	on	the	outside	but
beneath	that	even	an	unastute	human	observer	like	myself	can	see	she’s	got	serious
matters	on	her	mind.	I	particularly	enjoy	being	with	people	in	this	state	of	mind
because	it	means	they’re	dealing	with	serious	issues,	but	there’s	no	rush	about
anything	so	I	keep	the	conversation	light	and	cheerful	and	try	to	help	her	relax.
	
	
Kill	the	Swiss
	
The	next	morning	she’s	up	late.	I	know	she	brought	a	bunch	of	books	and	a	folder
of	internet	printouts	and	that	she’s	working	at	reading	and	writing	to	get	herself	to
some	resolution	so	that	probably	kept	her	up	into	the	small	hours.	I	get	her	seated	at
the	raised	breakfast	bar	that’s	a	part	of	the	kitchen’s	island	counter,	pour	her	some
juice	and	get	started	cooking	her	an	omelet.
	
As	we	animate	these	householder	characters	and	inhabit	this	scene	of	domestic
routine,	she	begins	to	talk	about	“important”	stuff.	She	starts	sharing	her	views	on
Buddhism	with	me.	After	a	few	minutes	of	listening	to	her	it	becomes	clear	that
she’s	trying	to	sell	herself	on	Buddhism	by	trying	to	sell	it	to	me.	It’s	also	clear
from	the	eagerness	with	which	she’s	trying	to	sell	it	that	she	has	reservations	that
have	not	yet	resolved	themselves	into	focus	for	her.	She	talks	to	me	in	a	way	that
suggests	that	she’s	really	trying	to	convince	herself	of	something	she	knows	better

=== Page 56 ===
than	 to	 believe.	 That’s	 how	 desperation	 works;	 the	 frightened	 heart	 seeks	 to
overrule	the	doubting	mind.	Fear	overshadows	reason	and	gives	rise	to	faith.
	
I	don’t	say	anything.	I	finish	her	omelet	and	put	it	in	front	of	her	and	allow	her	to	go
on.	She	started	out	with	a	life-is-suffering	thing	but	that’s	hard	to	pull	off	if	you’ve
never	missed	a	meal	or	had	a	physical	ailment	more	grievous	than	a	zit.	She	then
edged	briefly	into	some	bodhisattva	thing	about	not	resting	until	all	sentient	beings
are	liberated	which	made	us	both	grimace	a	bit,	then	a	few	words	in	praise	of
mindfulness	and	tranquility,	and	now	she’s	talking	about	compassion.	I	could	tell
her	that	compassion	is	just	another	way	of	keeping	our	attention	turned	safely
outward	rather	than	destructively	inward,	but	if	I	don’t	interrupt	I’m	confident	that
she’ll	hear	the	same	discordant	note	in	her	words	that	I	hear	and	talk	herself	out	of
whatever	she’s	trying	to	talk	herself	into.	She	might	need	me	to	listen	to	this,	but
she	doesn’t	need	me	to	respond.	She’s	entering	Buddhism	along	a	circular	drive,
and	 if	 I	 don’t	 interrupt	 her	 process	 she’ll	 soon	 be	 back	 out	 on	 the	 road,
disappointed,	but	ready	to	continue	the	journey.
	
She	winds	down	and	picks	at	her	omelet.
	
“Jolene,	pretend	there’s	a	big	red	button	on	the	counter,	okay?”
	
“Okay,”	she	says,	perked	up	by	a	new	game.
	
“If	you	press	it,	you	kill	everyone	in	Switzerland.”
	
She	gives	me	her	reserved,	lip-biting	smile.
	
“Okay,”	she	says	warily.
	
“If	you	press	it,	no	one	will	ever	know.	You’ll	never	be	blamed	or	connected	to	the
deaths	of	all	those	millions	of	nice	Swiss	people.”
	
“Yeah?”	she	says.	“So?”
	
“So	why	not	press	it?”
	
She	brightens	and	begins	to	answer	immediately,	then	darkens	and	bites	down	on
her	bottom	lip	to	hold	the	answer	in.	This	is	like	one	of	those	goofy	morality
questions	they	ask	you	in	the	seventh	grade,	like	would	you	turn	in	a	friend	for

=== Page 57 ===
shoplifting,	except	I’m	not	trying	to	teach	her	morality,	I’m	trying	to	help	her	get
past	it.
	
She’s	looking	for	a	safe	haven	and	she	hopes	she’s	found	it	in	Buddhism,	but	some
part	of	her	knows	she	hasn’t.	Here’s	the	thing	they	don’t	tell	you	about	compassion,
maybe	because	they	don’t	know:	Compassion	has	nothing	to	do	with	awakening.
It’s	unrelated.	It	sounds	good	and	it’s	a	tough	thing	to	take	a	stand	against,	but	it’s	a
total	 disconnect.	 The	 Golden	 Rule	 of	 Compassionism	 is	 Do	 Unto	 Others.	 The
Golden	Rule	of	Awakism	is	Think	For	Yourself.	There	is	no	such	thing	as	a	Buddha
of	Compassion.	If	you’re	compassionate	prior	to	awakening,	that	impulse	indicates
an	area	where	something	false	needs	to	be	hacked	away.	If	you’re	compassionate
after	awakening,	you’re	not	awake.	If	you’re	holding	out	for	the	awakened	state	that
includes	compassion,	maybe	you’ll	find	Buddhism	a	comfortable	place	to	kill	the
time.
	
I	watch	Jolene.	I	don’t	know	much	about	human	beings,	but	I	can	see	what’s	going
on	in	her	head.	The	first	thing	she	realized	is	that	this	question	has	something	to	do
with	what	she	came	here	for,	even	though	she	hasn’t	told	me	what	that	is	yet	and
she	 may	 not	 be	 sure	 herself.	 Next,	 she	 started	 mentally	 scrolling	 through	 the
obvious	answers—they’re	innocent	people,	it’s	just	plain	wrong,	I’ll	roast	in	hell,
etc—without	settling	on	one.	After	that	she	would	have	looked	for	less	obvious
answers—karmic	imbalance,	European	destabilization,	leaving	the	Alps	unattended
—found	none,	and	is	now,	or	I	miss	my	guess,	revisiting	the	obvious	ones.	She
looks	 very	 frustrated	 at	 her	 inability	 to	 provide	 a	 simple	 answer	 to	 a	 simple
question.
	
The	reason	for	picking	on	Buddhism	is	to	better	understand	Maya.	It’s	her	thing.	We
all	buy	into	the	notion	that	in	order	to	awaken	an	intermediary	is	required,	an
intercessor,	but	the	only	intercessor	is	Maya.	Kill	the	intercessor.	Kill	the	teacher.
Kill	the	Buddha.	DIY.	You	have	eyes,	you	have	a	brain,	do	the	math,	look	for
yourself.	This	isn’t	one	way,	it’s	the	only	way.	That’s	why	I’ve	taken	measures	to
make	sure	no	one	can	glom	onto	me,	to	appoint	me	their	personal	savior,	to	wedge
me	in	between	themselves	and	reality.	That’s	our	natural	tendency	in	these	perilous
waters;	 to	 reach	 out,	 to	 grab	 something,	 to	 attach,	 to	 put	 something	 between
ourselves	and	the	threat	of	eternal	nothingness	that	lurks	just	beneath	the	surface.
We	want	to	maintain	the	illusion	that	we	are	not	completely	alone	on	an	infinite	sea
but,	of	course,	that’s	exactly	what	we	are.
	
And	there	ain’t	no	we	about	it.
	

=== Page 58 ===
“I’d	 feel	 terrible,”	 Jolene	 says	 at	 last,	 making	 it	 more	 of	 a	 question	 than	 an
assertion.	 I	 give	 her	 the	 mean	 look	 and	 she	 squirms	 and	 goes	 back	 to	 work.
Whatever	she	answers,	I’ll	give	her	the	mean	look.	I	don’t	want	her	to	answer	it,	I
just	want	her	to	think	about	it.	I	want	her	to	take	a	hard	look	at	obvious	answers.
What	could	be	more	obvious	than	the	reason	for	not	pushing	a	button	and	killing
millions	of	innocent	people?
	
And	yet—
	
“Why	should	I	press	it?”	Jolene	asks.	“Maybe	that’s	the	better	question.	I	don’t	need
a	reason	not	to	press	it	since	I	don’t	have	any	reason	to	press	it.	I’ll	just	go	on	as	if
there’s	no	button.	Or	maybe	there’s	no	reason	not	to	press	it.	Is	that	what	you’re
saying?	Fuck	it.	I	press	the	button,	right?”
	
“Those	are	evasions,”	I	reply.	“Neither	of	those	are	the	answers	to	the	question.	The
question	is	why	not	press	it.”
	
“I	don’t	know,”	she	says.	“Why	not?”
	
“Hell	if	I	know.”
	
She	slams	her	fist	down	on	the	imaginary	button	and	gives	me	a	mischievous	smile
like	she	might	have	just	done	something	terribly	naughty.
	
“Oh	well,”	I	say	ruefully,	“there	goes	yodeling.”
	
“Never	cared	for	it,”	she	says	through	a	big,	toothy	grin.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
After	a	few	days	we’ve	settled	into	a	routine	and	see	each	other	only	in	passing	and
for	one	or	two	meals	a	day,	usually	out,	usually	a	walk	or	short	cab	ride	away.
Jolene	has	been	doing	a	lot	more	with	her	time	here	than	just	hanging	out	with
unhip	 old	 me;	 she’s	 been	 getting	 out	 and	 networking.	 Once	 she	 had	 her
arrangements	in	place	to	be	here	for	a	week	she	started	using	the	internet	to	figure
out	where	she	wanted	to	go	including	some	temples,	some	Eastern	and	New	Age
book	shops,	and	at	least	one	mystical	coffee	shop.	She	branched	out	from	those
starting	points.	She’s	talked	to	people	and	followed	leads.	She	hasn’t	made	much
headway	with	the	subway	so	she’s	throwing	a	lot	of	money	at	cabs	and	zigzagging
around	the	city	and	borough-hopping	rather	haphazardly	and	surely	expensively.

=== Page 59 ===
	
She	hasn’t	kept	me	updated	on	her	activities,	but	I	can	imagine.	If	she’s	been
visiting	temples	and	speaking	with	monks	or	nuns,	they	might	have	treated	her	like
a	cute	little	tourist	girl	visiting	the	big	city	from	the	farmbelt	for	about	half	a
howdy-do,	but	then	they	would	have	found	something	unexpected.	They	would
have	found	that	cute	little	ninety-eight	pound	Jolene	has	the	hunger.	She	doesn’t
want	the	tour	and	she	doesn’t	want	the	brochure.	She	wants	very	specific	answers	to
very	specific	questions.	If	she	can’t	get	them	to	come	out	of	the	gentle	monk’s
mouth,	she’ll	crawl	into	his	brain	with	a	flashlight	and	a	pickaxe	to	see	if	they’re	in
there.	 If	 she	 doesn’t	 find	 what	 she’s	 looking	 for,	 the	 monk	 will	 become	 as
disposable	as	a	gum	wrapper.	I	know	all	this	because	I	know	the	hunger	and	I	know
that	it’s	growing	inside	Jolene.	She’s	not	looking	for	new	friends,	she’s	not	looking
for	general	knowledge	or	pleasant	experiences.	She’s	getting	into	a	very	serious
frame	of	mind	and	her	appetites	are	getting	very	powerful	and	very	specific.	I	don’t
mean	to	get	another	vampire	thing	going	here,	but	it’s	a	wickedly	good	analogy.
	
	
Improbability
	
After	she’s	been	around	for	a	few	days	I	ask	what	she’s	been	eating	during	her
forays	into	the	spiritual	side	of	the	city.	She	answers,	not	surprisingly,	not	much.
She	grabs	a	coffee	and	a	pastry	when	she	can,	maybe	a	salad	now	and	then.	The
idea	of	someone	visiting	New	York	and	not	experiencing	a	proper	deli	is	unbearable
so	I	ask	her	to	pencil	me	in	for	lunch	today	and	off	we	go.
	
As	we	entered	the	narrow	deli	we	got	squeezed	in	behind	a	woman	of	about	sixty;
short,	stout,	and	severe.	Just	inside	the	door	she	dropped	her	leather	binder	on	the
floor.	I	couldn’t	get	around	her	to	be	a	gentleman	and	pick	it	up	for	her,	so	we	had
nowhere	to	go	until	she	retrieved	it	and	moved	on.	What	spilled	out	of	her	binder
was	unmistakably	a	copy	of	Damnedest	with	the	black	and	white	cover	of	the	pre-
publication	review	copies,	all	marked	up,	bulging	with	post-it	notes,	and	held	closed
with	rubber	bands.	Jolene	saw	it	as	clearly	as	I	did.
	
We	entered	the	deli.	The	woman	took	a	number	and	waited	to	be	served.	I	motioned
to	Jolene	and	we	turned	around	and	left.	As	we	walked	I	knew	Jolene	was	watching
me	with	a	big	drop-jawed	grin	on	her	face,	but	I	wasn’t	ready	to	deal	with	her
amazement	yet,	I	was	still	dealing	with	my	own.
	
This	was	way	beyond	too	much.	What	are	the	odds?	Too	astronomical	to	compute.
There	are	only	like	fifty	of	these	pre-pub	copies	in	existence.	What	are	the	chances

=== Page 60 ===
that	I’ll	be	in	New	York,	entering	some	deli	behind	some	woman	in	such	a	way	that
I	can’t	get	by,	just	as	she	drops	her	binder	and	spills	out	a	copy	of	a	book	I’d	just
finished	writing,	face	up	so	I	could	see	what	it	was?	No	chance.	The	whole	thing
was	so	far	outside	the	realm	of	possibility	that	my	first	impulse	was	to	look	around
for	the	hidden	cameras	of	some	TV	stunt.
	
I	am	pretty	well	attuned	to	the	subtle	nuances	of	the	universe.	It’s	through	this
carefully	developed	sense	that	I	relate	to	the	world	with	an	unerring	ease	and
confidence.	 This	 thing	 with	 the	 proof	 copy,	 however,	 had	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
nuance.	This	was	a	deafening	gong,	nothing	subtle	about	it,	but	indicating	what?
For	what	purpose?	I	had	absolutely	no	idea.	It	was	just	this	huge,	astounding	non-
thing.	This	event	was	so	fantastically	unlikely	that	I	might	have	doubted	my	own
memory	afterward	had	not	Jolene	seen	it	as	clearly	as	I.
	
(Perhaps	that	woman	will	someday	read	this	and	remember	dropping	the	book	as
she	entered	a	deli	and	find	out	now	that	the	author	of	the	book	was	standing	inches
behind	her.	What	will	she	make	of	that?)
	
My	mind	scurried	to	get	a	handle	on	this,	but	couldn’t.	What’s	the	point	of	such	a
bizarre	occurrence?	What	am	I	to	make	of	it?	Has	the	universe	simply	abandoned
all	 restraint?	 It’s	 so	 utterly,	 preposterously,	 incalculably	 unlikely	 that	 the	 only
conclusion	you	can	come	to	is	that,	once	you	get	to	know	it	a	little	bit,	the	universe
is	really	just	a	big,	playful	puppy.
	
I	might	interpret	it	to	mean	that	the	universe	is	telling	me	we’re	headed	into	a	whole
new	way	of	functioning	wherein	nothing	is	too	much,	nothing	too	absurd	or	too
fantastic.	Maybe	the	dream	metaphor	is	no	metaphor	at	all.	Or	maybe	the	universe
is	telling	me	that	the	book	was	out	there	now,	that	it’s	a	living	thing	with	its	own
course	 to	 follow,	 its	 own	 destiny.	 Too	 much?	 Not	 enough?	 None	 of	 these
explanations	feel	right,	but	I	can’t	tell.	Maybe	the	dream	is	unraveling	right	before
my	eyes.	That	would	be	redundant	and	I’d	mildly	rather	it	didn’t,	but	who	knows.
Maybe	the	universe,	for	its	own	reasons,	wanted	me	to	write	about	this	experience,
to	 play	 with	 these	 conclusions	 in	 print.	 Maybe	 it	 happened	 so	 I	 could	 say	 it
happened,	so	someone	could	learn	something	by	reading	about	it,	get	their	next
door	opened.	Maybe	it	was,	somehow,	for	Jolene.	I	really	have	no	idea.	Fortunately,
I	don’t	feel	the	need	to	understand	everything.	Most	things	make	themselves	clear
in	time,	but	there’s	nothing	in	me	that	suggests	that	if	something	doesn’t	make	sense
to	me,	it	must	not	make	sense.	Everything	makes	sense.	In	the	few	years	since	this
incident	I’ve	had	a	dozen	other	similar	probability-defying	experiences,	and	the
explanation	I’ve	settled	on	is	the	big,	playful	puppy	theory.

=== Page 61 ===
	
	
My	Uncle	the	Vampire
	
I’m	laying	on	an	armless	leather	couch	trying	to	establish	a	deeper	rapport	with
Mozart’s	Requiem	which	is	being	played	on	DVD	by	full	symphony	orchestra	on
the	TV	and	filling	the	room	from	the	surround-sound	speaker	system.	I	have	a	ticket
for	a	performance	of	Requiem	in	a	few	weeks,	and	I	don’t	like	to	go	to	these	things
cold.	I	have	the	DVD,	a	CD,	and	some	books	to	help	me	out	so	that	when	I	attend
the	 actual	 performance	 I’ll	 have	 at	 least	 a	 basic	 familiarity	 with	 what’s	 being
expressed,	by	who,	and	why,	and	this	will	allow	me	to	relax	and	appreciate	the
experience	rather	than	waste	it	by	staying	in	my	head	the	whole	time.	I’m	a	little
familiar	with	the	Requiem	but	I’m	not	a	real	classical	music	buff,	so	it’s	this	added
dimension	that	makes	the	whole	thing	so	enjoyable.
	
Mozart	died	before	finishing	the	Requiem	and	there	are	several	versions	of	the
completed	work;	the	DVD	I	have	is	the	Levin	version	and	I	have	a	CD	of	the
Maunder	version,	but	the	performance	will	be	the	Süssmayr	version,	so	it’s	an
interesting	adventure	in	appreciation.	Or	so	I’d	hoped.	As	it	turned	out,	I	only
muddied	the	whole	thing	for	myself;	I	should	have	gone	deep	into	one	instead	of
shallow	into	three.	Nevertheless,	it	was	an	interesting	endeavor	and	still	is.	I	kept	at
it	and	I	now	have	a	much	better	understanding	of	the	piece	and	of	the	attempts	to
finish	it,	and	I	now	have	a	preference	for	the	Levin	version	from	a	more	informed
perspective.
	
I	bore	you	with	all	this	to	explain	what	I	mean	when	I	say	I	went	to	NYC	to	wallow
in	the	arts	for	awhile.	I	don’t	race	through	museums,	see	every	play	and	concert	and
snarf	 down	 expensive	 meals.	 On	 this	 particular	 trip	 I	 put	 my	 attention	 on	 the
Requiem,	two	plays,	a	dozen	or	so	restaurants,	The	Cloisters	in	northern	Manhattan,
and	the	Botanical	Gardens	in	the	Bronx.	There	was	some	other	miscellaneous	stuff,
and	I	also	went	to	Chicago	for	a	week	at	one	point,	but	the	way	I	go	about	this	sort
of	thing	is	to	get	a	bit	immersed	instead	of	just	skipping	across	the	surface.
	
Interesting?	Probably	not,	but	that’s	what	I’m	doing,	head	flipped	back	over	the	end
of	the	couch,	mouth	agape,	somber	music	filling	the	room,	when	in	walks	Jolene
plus	 one.	 Although	 viewing	 the	 situation	 upside	 down,	 I	 can	 see	 that	 she	 has
brought	home	a	stray.	I	hit	the	pause	button,	close	my	mouth,	and	roll	awkwardly
over,	backward	and	upward	until	I’m	approximately	upright.
	

=== Page 62 ===
Jolene	 introduces	 me	 to	 Zach.	 He’s	 tall,	 thin,	 early	 twenties	 and	 exceedingly
groomed.	He	has	one	of	those	closely	trimmed	moustache	and	partial	beard	deals
that	combine	with	his	two	small	hoop	earrings	to	give	him	a	pirate-ish	air.	I’m
pained	to	think	that	just	shaving	and	trimming	hair	must	take	him	an	hour	each
morning,	which	is	about	what	I	spend	on	it	per	annum.	I	shake	his	hand,	trying	not
to	come	off	like	Jolene’s	parent	or	guardian,	and	tell	them	to	make	themselves	at
home.
	
Jolene	grabs	some	bottles	of	iced	tea	out	of	the	fridge	and	passes	them	around
before	plopping	down	on	the	futon	I	just	sprang	up	from,	so	I	turn	off	the	TV	and
DVD	player	and	start	to	consider	what	I	want	to	do	next.	Zach	stands	nearby,
holding	his	bottle,	and	I’m	just	standing	there	holding	mine,	and	I	start	to	get	the
idea	that	we’re	all	here	together	rather	than	them	being	together	and	me	going	away.
Being	socially	inept,	my	usual	response	to	situations	like	this	is	to	do	what	I	like
and	let	people	be	offended	if	they	want.	In	this	case,	that	means	I	leave,	which	I
start	to	do	when	Jolene	speaks	up.
	
“Zach	and	I	met	at	the	coffee	shop,”	she	informs	me.	I	knew	she	had	heard	about
some	nearby	coffee	place	with	a	mystical	motif	and	a	spiritually	oriented	crowd	and
that	was	where	she	had	gone	off	to	this	afternoon.	I	didn’t	know	they	offered	take-
outs	like	young	Zach,	but	it	really	couldn’t	be	less	of	my	business.	Seeing	that	I
have	no	response	but	an	insipid	smile,	she	continues.
	
“Zach	is	going	to	be	a	really	great	spiritual	teacher	someday,”	she	goes	on.	“He	was
in	the	coffee	shop	talking	and	there	were	like	ten	people	standing	around	his	table
listening	to	him.”	She	smiles	at	me	and	there’s	a	twinkle	of	playfulness	in	her	look,
so	now	I’m	a	little	more	interested.	What	has	she	dragged	back	to	our	lair,	and	why?
	
“I	told	him	about	you,”	she	says	and	I	feel	my	head	tilt	slightly.	I	know	she	didn’t
tell	him	about	me,	but	I	guess	she	told	him	something.	“I	told	him	you	had	very
strong	spiritual	beliefs	but	that	they	were	not	really	in	the	mainstream	and	that	you
were	writing	a	book,	and	he	said	he’d	like	to	meet	you	someday	and	I	said	how
‘bout	now?”
	
I’m	intrigued	because	I	know	that	she	hasn’t	done	what	it	looks	like	she’s	done	and
I’m	wondering	what	she’s	really	doing.	I’m	also	amused	by	the	fact	that	she’s	doing
it;	playing	me	without	me	knowing	exactly	how.	She	hasn’t	brought	him	here	so	she
could	watch	me	devour	him	like	something	out	of	an	episode	of	My	Uncle	the
Vampire.	That	would	be	pointless	and	unkind,	which	she’s	not,	so	her	little	tease

=== Page 63 ===
isn’t	working	on	that	level,	but	that	doesn’t	explain	what	she	is	doing.	Why	did	she
bring	this	young	man	here?
	
The	way	to	spring	the	trap	is	to	try	backing	out	of	it.	“She’s	overstated	it	a	bit,”	I
say	to	Zach.	“I	just	talk	a	good	game.”	I	start	heading	out.	“Excuse	me,	I	have	some
work	to	catch	up	on.”
	
“What’s	your	book	going	to	be	about?”	asks	Zach,	trying	to	get	a	game	going.	I
look	at	Jolene	who	looks	back	with	mock	curiosity.
	
“No	book,”	I	say,	“just	playing	with	some	ideas—”
	
“Jolene	said	you	didn’t	really	agree	with—”
	
“Really,	I	don’t	know	much—”
	
“You	know,	tradition	teaches	us—”
	
“Conformity	and	stagnation?”
	
“Huh?”
	
“I	thought	you	were	going	to	say	that	tradition	teaches	conformity	and	stagnation.”
	
“I	mean	Buddhist	tradition.	Buddhist	tradition	shows	us—”
	
“Forget	tradition.	Start	fresh,	you’ll	have	a	much	better	time	of	it.	Start	your	own
tradition.	Really,	I	have	to	run—”
	
He	laughs	a	bit.	“You	can’t	just	dismiss	centuries	of—”
	
“Sure	you	can,”	I	say.	“In	fact,	you	have	to,	or	else	you’ll	end	up	right	where
everyone	always	ends	up.	What’s	the	point	of	that?”
	
He	laughs	a	bit	uncomfortably,	sizing	me	up	to	see	what	he’s	dealing	with.	Tradition
is	just	a	word	for	stuff	you	accept	as	true	without	verifying	it	for	yourself.	Tradition
is	the	deeply	rutted	path	that	gets	formed	after	many	years	of	being	followed	by	the
herd.	Buddha	said	this...	Shankara	said	that...	Who	gives	a	fat	rat’s	ass	what	they
said	or	what	anyone	said?	You	don’t	know	they	said	it,	you	don’t	know	what	they
meant	by	it,	you	don’t	know	if	it’s	been	passed	down	accurately,	you	don’t	even

=== Page 64 ===
know	they	existed,	so	what	do	you	know?	You	don’t	know	anything,	and	even	if
you	did,	you	still	wouldn’t.	It’s	self-verify	or	fail,	simple	as	that.	The	uncritical
acceptance	typical	of	the	herd	mentality	is	the	soil	in	which	all	false	beliefs	take
root.	Instead	of	self-reliance	and	self-determination,	most	people	just	buy	a	package
deal;	no	thinking	required.
	
“Jolene	told	me	you	like	to	take	a	subjective	approach.”
	
Yes,	I	am	reminded,	Jolene	is	all	that	matters	here.
	
“As	opposed	to	what?”	I	ask.
	
“As	opposed	to	taking	an	objective	look,”	he	says.	He	seems	to	catch	a	wave	of
energy	and	suddenly	he’s	off.	“You	have	to	get	the	whole	picture,	you	have	to
understand	just	what	a	really	great	evolutionary	plan	we’re	a	part	of.	This	whole
thing,	this	whole	planet	earth	and	human	race	and	all	the	rest	of	it,	it’s	like	this	one
great	big	spiraling	self-evolving	experiment	in	the	mind	of	God.	I	plan	on	going	to	a
Zen	monastery	as	soon	as	I	can	get	up	the	money	to	get	to	Kyoto.	Get	myself	into
the	presence	of	a	true	master.	Those	people	really	understand	this	stuff.”
	
He’s	a	full-body	talker.	His	energy	extends	outward	into	his	arms	and	legs	so	the	his
hands	lend	emphasis	to	every	point	and	his	whole	body	moves	up	and	down,	to	and
fro.	He	has	to	set	his	bottle	of	tea	down	or	he’d	jostle	it	all	over	the	floor.	I
prudishly	place	a	coaster	under	his	bottle	and	he	doesn’t	miss	a	beat.
	
“We	look	at	this	whole	thing,	this	whole	world	thing,	as	if	it’s	real,	but	there’s	no
reality	 to	 it,”	 he	 exclaims	 animatedly.	 “Perception	 creates	 reality,	 but	 whose
perception?	Mine?	Yours?	Jolene’s?”
	
I	shake	my	head	in	wide-eyed	bewilderment.
	
“No,”	he	continues,	“because	we	have	no	more	reality	than	anything	else.	That’s	the
whole	thing	Zen	teaches	us,	that	there	is	no	us.	Ego,	self,	me,	you,	it’s	all	an
illusion,	a	facade.	Zen	destroys	the	facade.	That’s	the	purpose	of	zazen,	of	sitting	in
meditation	under	the	guidance	of	a	great	roshi.	That’s	what	koans	are	for.	You	have
to	break	through	these	barriers.	It’s	all	really	so	simple.	They	make	it	seem	so
complicated	so	you	have	to	keep	coming	to	them	to	get	it	explained	or	something,
you	know,	the	religious	people	and	the	gurus	and	everyone,	but	it’s	really	so	simple
—”
	

=== Page 65 ===
I	can	see	now	what	my	role	is	to	be.	I	would	never	consider	conducting	any	sort	of
dialogue	with	Zach	since	he’s	very	much	in	the	outward-expression	mode	and
nowhere	close	to	the	shut-up-and-listen	mode.	He	has	no	questions,	only	answers.
Anyway,	Jolene	wouldn’t	have	brought	him	here	just	to	see	me	debate	him	on	his
level.	I	start	to	suspect	that	the	reason	she	did	bring	him	here	is	quite	nearly	the
same	reason	for	her	coming	here	in	the	first	place.
	
“We’re	all	just	pieces,”	continues	Zach	without	pause,	“small	units	playing	our	role
in	this	vast	spatio-temporal	matrix,	like	a	universal	continuum,	you	know?	We’re	all
so	small,	and	yet,	each	of	us	is	like	the	whole	thing.	It	looks	like	there’s	all	this	stuff
going	on,	but	there	is	no	stuff;	no	you,	no	me.	That’s	the	whole	point	of	Zen
Buddhism	and	that’s	why	it’s	so	cool.	You	don’t	learn	it,	you	do	it.	You	don’t	study
and	work	hard	to	master	concepts,	you	sit	and	work	on	koans	under	a	qualified
roshi	until	the	whole	illusion	thing	just	pops	out	of	existence.	See?	Ultimately	there
is	only	consciousness.	Everything	else	is	just	perception.”
	
“Cool,”	I	say,	smiling	and	nodding	to	keep	him	going.	Out	of	the	corner	of	my	eye	I
see	what	I	hope	to	see.	Jolene	has	a	polite,	attentive	smile	pasted	on	her	face,	but	in
her	eyes	I	can	see	that	this	little	get	together	is	playing	out	as	well	as	could	be
hoped.	She	is	seriously	unamused.	Maybe	Zach	sounded	better	to	her	in	the	coffee
shop.	Probably	she’s	never	seen	anyone	like	Zach,	or	been	exposed	to	this	sort	of
big,	fun,	spiritual	odyssey	approach	before.
	
“There’s	 only	 one	 truth,	 dude,	 see?	 And	 it	 doesn’t	 matter	 what	 you	 call	 your
spiritual	path,	whether	it’s	Christianity	or	Buddhism	or	Catholic	or	Zen,	cause	it’s
really	all	the	same	thing.	This	right	here,”	he	indicates	us,	the	loft,	earth,	the	third
dimension,	“this	ain’t	it,	man.	This	ain’t	the	real	thing.	The	real	thing	is,	like,
beyond	all	our	dreams.”
	
I	see	how	he	functions.	I	see	that	he’s	so	consumed	by	playing	his	big	expressive
role	that	it	will	be	virtually	impossible	for	him	to	hear	anything	except	his	next	cue.
I	test	this	theory	with	an	out-of-nowhere	question	so	Jolene	can	see	it	too.
	
“But	what	about	war?”	I	ask.
	
“War,	exactly!	That’s	what	I’m	saying.	If	everyone	would	just,	you	know,	like	burst
out	of	their	self-centered	me-me-me	mindset	and	try	to	adopt	the	universal	view
which,	like	I’m	saying,	is	the	real	thing,	the	way	things	really	are,	then	they’d	forget
all	about	war.	Can	you	imagine	what	a	paradise	this	world	could	be	if	everyone	just
became,	like,	aware	of	their	true	potential?	Can	you	imagine?”	He	looks	to	both

=== Page 66 ===
Jolene	and	me	to	see	if	we	can	imagine	and	is	too	swept	up	in	his	own	momentum
to	 notice	 that	 we’re	 not	 exactly	 in	 the	 same	 space	 he’s	 in.	 “War	 would	 be
completely	forgotten.	It	would	be	like	something	in	the	history	books.	And	instead
of	man	focusing	all	his	attention	and	resources	on,	you	know,	the	Pentagon	and
controlling	other	people	and	stuff,	we	could	focus	on	the	things	that	really	matter,
like	feeding	people	and	curing	disease	and	flood	relief	and	stuff.	Can	you	imagine	if
everyone	just	stopped	all	this	coveting	and	hatred	and	fear	and	really	started	pulling
together	and	trying	to	make	a	difference?	Think	of	what	a	wonderful	paradise	this
whole	world	could	be	if	there	were	no	more	polluters	and	oil	spills	and	crime	and
stuff.	This	would	be	paradise.	It	would	be	like	heaven	except	not	later	in	some
weird,	you	know,	after	you	die	and	clouds	and	everything,	but	right	here,	on	earth.
That’s	what	God	really	wants	for	us	but	we’ve	totally	screwed	it	up.”
	
He	pauses	to	take	a	breath	and	to	see	if	we’re	managing	to	keep	up.	It’s	obvious	that
he’s	reading	from	several	different	scripts.	A	not	uncommon	approach;	Melting-Pot
Spirituality,	New	Age	Eclectic.	He’s	like	a	bag	lady	combing	the	alleyways	of
esoteric	philosophy	and	tossing	every	pretty	bauble	and	goo-gaw	he	finds	into	his
magical	mystery	cart,	eager	to	share	his	mismatched	collection	with	anyone	who
can’t	distinguish	priceless	from	worthless.	I	suppose	that	if	he	ever	gets	to	a	Kyoto
monastery	the	first	thing	they’ll	do	is	hoist	him	up	by	the	ankles	and	shake	all	this
loose	crap	out	of	him	like	weapons	off	a	cartoon	gangster.
	
I’m	toning	his	speech	down	a	bit	in	order	to	give	the	reader	some	idea	of	what	he
was	saying	without	using	all	the	exclamation	points	a	more	accurate	rendering
would	 require.	 I’ve	 also	 taken	 the	 liberty	 of	 removing	 many	 hundreds	 of	 you
knows,	 likes,	 stuffs,	 mans	 and	 dudes.	 I	 never	 really	 had	 much	 exposure	 to
coffeehouse	spirituality,	if	that’s	what	this	could	be	called,	but	I’m	actually	enjoying
it.	Zach	has	a	lot	of	personal	charm	and	the	fact	that	he’s	so	stoked	up	by	what	he’s
talking	about	makes	him	fun	to	listen	to,	for	me	anyway.	I	don’t	think	Jolene	is
having	so	much	fun.	I	look	and	see	what	Zach	has	failed	to	notice;	Jolene	is	staring
straight	through	him.	I	also	see	that	this	couldn’t	have	been	planned	better;	Zach’s
scattergun	message	and	unique	style	of	spiritual	carpetbombing	is	exactly	what	she
needs	to	be	seeing	right	now.
	
“So	what	can	we	do	about	it?”	I	ask,	not	wanting	to	let	Zach	pause	too	long	and	lose
his	momentum.	He	eyes	me	for	an	instant	to	see	if	I’m	sincere	and	either	decides	I
am	or	that	it	doesn’t	matter	before	launching	back	into	his	discourse.	I	want	to	keep
him	going	a	bit	longer	because	I	want	Jolene	to	get	this	and	be	done	with	it.
Whatever	is	operating	in	her,	I	don’t	want	it	left	squirming	because	I	was	soft	and

=== Page 67 ===
wanted	to	be	gentle	with	her.	It’s	much	more	humane	to	get	these	things	killed	while
the	killing	is	good.
	
“Exactly!”	Zach	resumes	with	infectious	good	cheer.	“What	can	we	do?	That’s	the
whole	issue.	The	whole	question	of,	you	know,	spirituality,	of	religion,	comes	down
to	that	one	thing;	what	can	we	actually	do?	We	have	to	grow,	expand.	We	have	to
shake	off	this,”	here	he	twists	his	mouth	and	squints	his	eyes	and	curls	his	fingers
into	claws	to	convey	his	disgust	at	what	most	people	call	life,	“this	smallness,	this
smallness,”	he	says.	He	looks	to	see	if	I	get	it.	I	have	the	next	question	in	my	eyes.
Yes,	my	gaze	asks,	but	how?
	
“How	do	we	do	it?”	he	states	it	aloud.	“That’s	the	big	question.	How	do	we	get	out
of	 our	 small	 irrelevant	 little	 selves	 and	 start	 enjoying,	 you	 know,	 reaping	 the
benefits	of	our	true	potential?	It’s	all	about	self-realization.	That’s	all	it	is,	really.	It
all	sounds	so	massive	and,	you	know,	like	science	fiction,	but	it’s	not.	That’s	the
thing.	This	isn’t	all	pie	in	the	sky	and	everything.	This	is	the	truth	of	each	one	of	us.
This	is	who	we	really	are.”
	
And?	say	my	eyes.
	
“And,”	he	rocks	on,	“that’s	what	we	have	to	do.	We	have	to	break	out	of	these	tiny
little	shells	and	then	we	can	step	up	into	our	true	universal	selves.	That’s	where	it’s
at.	All	this	here,	everything	we	think	of	as	everything	is	really	like	nothing.	That’s
what	Zen	is	all	about,	returning	to	our	true	state;	the	state	of	non-being.	Once	we	do
that,	realize	our	true	state,	we’re	liberated.	No	more	coming	back.	No	more	cycle	of
births	and	deaths.	No	more	karma,	no	more	suffering.	We’re	finally	free!”
	
Zach	goes	on	for	another	few	minutes	but	starts	losing	energy	and	fumbling	a	bit
when	it	comes	to	the	actual	methods	by	which	such	liberation	might	be	attained.	He
has	some	favorable	views	on	meditation,	prana,	kundalini,	getting	outside	more,
eating	better,	reading	elevating	books,	drinking	green	tea,	and	spending	less	time	in
malls.	He	looks	around	at	our	fairly	upscale	digs	and	gives	me	a	look	that	suggests	I
might	take	an	honest	look	my	own	overly	acquisitive	tendencies.	I	guess	Jolene
didn’t	tell	him	it	was	a	rental.
	
The	point	of	sharing	all	this	isn’t	to	poke	fun	at	Zach	or	anyone	at	Zach’s	particular
level	of	comprehension.	I	think	I	was	probably	like	Zach	myself	at	some	point;
thrilled	and	awed,	eager	to	express	and	share,	a	little	sketchy	as	far	as	doctrine
went;	a	big-eyed	boy	in	a	vast	toystore	of	shiny	new	ideas.	Jolene	is	probably	right,
a	few	more	years	and	someone	with	Zach’s	enthusiasm	and	powerful	presence	will

=== Page 68 ===
probably	be	playing	the	satsang	circuit.	He	can’t	keep	pounding	out	his	crazy	jazz
chops,	though.	It’s	not	enough	to	be	a	great	player,	you’ve	got	to	have	something	to
play.	People	want	a	catchy	melody	laid	over	a	soothing,	familiar	harmony.	If	he’s
smart	he’ll	hitch	his	wagon	to	Advaita;	that’s	the	hot	new	sound.	He’s	tending
toward	Zen,	but	that	tune	has	been	played	to	death.	The	industry	needs	a	new	Zen
and	Advaita	fits	the	bill;	it	sounds	exotic,	it	means	something	vaguely	profound	yet
unthreatening,	and	no	one	cares	about	its	roots	so	it	comes	with	no	baggage	and	can
be	molded	to	meet	the	demands	of	the	marketplace.	No,	it’s	not	a	merchandiser’s
dream	like	Zen,	but	they’ll	fix	that	and	soon	we’ll	all	be	buying	Advaita	cookware
and	Advaita	thongs	and	Advaita	ceiling	tiles	in	no	time.	A	sugary	sort	of	Advaita
junk-philosophy	has	already	begun	to	emerge	and	I’m	sure	it	will	have	its	own	key
figures—perhaps	Zach	someday—writing	books	and	instructing	us	in	the	Way	of
Nonduality.	Shit,	as	I	think	about	it	I’m	talking	myself	into	writing	another	book,
something	with	huge	commercial	appeal,	like	
Zen	and	the	Tao	of	Advaita:	The
Pathless	Path	of	No-Mind	to	Not-Twoness
.
	
Or	maybe	Zach	will	go	to	Kyoto	and	hang	around	the	ball-busters	for	awhile.	That’s
a	sad	thought.	Westerners	seem	to	get	a	strong	Zen	buzz	built	up	and	the	next	thing
you	know	they’re	returning	from	a	Zen	monastery	five	years	later	with	less	to	show
for	those	years	than	if	they’d	been	spent	in	prison	or	a	coma.	Admirably,	they
seldom	allow	failure	to	discourage	them	from	writing	a	book	on	the	subject.
	
Most	likely,	young	Zach	will	just	get	himself	situated	at	his	own	spiritual	comfort
level	and	go	on	to	live	a	normal	life.	Anyway,	Zach	isn’t	my	concern,	Jolene	is.	I
manage	to	usher	Zach	out	as	Jolene	makes	a	vague	promise	to	meet	him	at	the
coffee	shop	before	she	leaves	the	city.	When	I	return	to	the	living	area	Jolene	has
gone	to	her	own	room	and	closed	the	door.
	
	
Bookstore	Guru
	
On	the	last	full	day	of	Jolene’s	visit,	one	of	the	big	downtown	bookstores	is	hosting
a	lunch	hour	reading	and	booksigning	by	a	bestselling	New	Age	author.	She	wanted
to	go	and	hear	him	speak.	She	asked	me	to	go	with	her,	which	I	did,	but	I	didn’t
want	to	listen	to	this	person	speak,	so	when	we	got	to	the	store	I	sent	her	in	alone
and	we	made	arrangements	to	meet	up	after.
	
I	arrive	at	our	appointed	meeting	place	early,	but	she’s	earlier.	She	looks	pretty
dejected	and	I’m	starting	to	have	a	pretty	good	idea	why.	She	came	here	looking	for
something	and	she’s	not	finding	it.	The	guy	who	spoke	at	the	bookstore	sells	a	lot	of

=== Page 69 ===
books	and	she	understood	that	to	mean	that	he	had	something	valid	to	say.	She
assumed,	as	many	do,	that	the	more	popular	a	teacher	is,	the	more	valuable	the
teaching.
	
“You’re	too	young	and	pretty	to	look	so	sad,”	I	tell	her.
	
“I’m	fine,”	she	replies.	“Can	we	go	somewhere	else?”
	
“Walk	or	sit?”
	
“Walk,	I	guess.”
	
We	walk	and	I	don’t	talk.	I’m	glad	she	seems	sad	and	angry.	I	would	have	been
surprised	and	a	bit	disappointed	if	she’d	come	away	from	that	event	in	high	spirits.	I
knew	she	wouldn’t,	though,	but	that	was	no	reason	to	discourage	her	from	going.
Just	the	opposite.	If	she	had	a	yearning	to	take	a	closer	look	at	this	particular	fellow
and	his	views	but	didn’t	follow	through	because	she	sensed	I	wouldn’t	approve,	that
would	have	just	been	repression	and	she’d	have	to	deal	with	the	source	of	the
yearning	again	later	in	a	more	pernicious	form.	The	process	of	awakening	is	a	series
of	disillusionments,	and	each	one	hurts.
	
We	head	down	into	the	subway	and	catch	the	c-train.	We	emerge	at	81st	street	and
head	into	Central	Park.	We	amble	about	and	she	shows	signs	of	recognizing	where
we	are	and	starts	bubbling	up	out	of	her	gloom.	She	knows	parts	of	the	park	from
different	movies	she’s	seen.	She’s	still	not	talkative	and	I’m	not	wishing	she	was,	so
we	head	over	to	Fifth	near	the	museums	and	hail	a	cab	back	to	the	loft.	Instead	of
going	up,	though,	we	stroll	down	the	street	to	a	coffee	place,	grab	some	fancy
drinks	and	settle	in	on	an	overstuffed	couch.	She	tucks	her	legs	under	her	so	she’s
able	to	face	me	more	directly.
	
I	want	to	talk	about	nothing	for	a	few	minutes.	I	know	what	kind	of	mindset	she’s	in
and	I	want	to	help	her	relax	a	little	and	not	be	jumping	out	of	her	skin.	I	launch	into
a	very	endearing	little	diatribe	about	how	the	marketing	bastards	at	the	ministry	of
newspeak	have	so	effectively	removed	the	words	small,	medium	and	large	from	our
vocabulary	 that	 coffee	 vendors	 and	 fast	 food	 clerks	 can’t	 even	 translate	 them
anymore.	If	you	want	a	medium	coffee	or	a	small	order	of	fries,	I	explain	to	Jolene
who	isn’t	half	listening,	you	have	to	learn	that	particular	establishment’s	particular
jargon.	In	one	place,	small,	medium	and	large	might	now	be	Grande,	Supremo	and
El	Presidente.	In	the	next	place	they’re	Large	(small),	Extra	Large	(medium),	and
Aversion	Therapy	(large).	Most	annoying	is	the	blank	look	you	receive	from	the

=== Page 70 ===
clerk	when	you	try	to	revert	to	simpler	but	unsanctioned	terminology.	“So,	Extra
Large	is	medium?”	you	ask.	“No,	like,	uh,	Extra	Large	is	Extra	Large,”	you’re	told.
	
I	look	up	when	she	doesn’t	respond	and	find	a	startling	sight.	She	is	staring	at	me,
wide-eyed,	tears	streaming	down	her	face.	She	is	completely	open	and	unabashed,
making	no	effort	to	conceal	herself.	She	allows	herself	to	be	profoundly	exposed.	I
show	respect	for	her	unguardedness	by	gazing	back	at	her	with	equal	frankness.	Her
breathing	is	a	barely	audible	moan.	This	is	a	very	sad	young	lady.
	
“I	feel	so	small,”	she	says	in	a	hoarse	whisper.	“I	feel	so	alone.	I’ve	never	felt	like
this.	I	don’t	see	an	end.	I	don’t	see	how	it	can	get	better.”
	
I	don’t	reply	right	away.	My	natural	tendency,	like	anyone’s,	I	suppose,	would	be	to
console	her,	but	she’s	in	the	early	stages	of	grieving	for	her	own	lost	life,	feeling	the
separation	from	herself	and	processing	that	unexpected	and	unprecedented	loss.	She
doesn’t	need	to	be	consoled	at	this	point,	she	needs	to	go	through	this	and	come	out
the	other	side.	The	thing	she’s	grieving	for	isn’t	fully	dead	and	the	thing	that’s
grieving	isn’t	fully	born,	so	what	she’s	going	through	right	now	is	more	like	the
coming	attractions	reel.
	
“Try	to	step	out	of	yourself	and	observe	this	moment,”	I	tell	her.	“I	know	that
sounds	difficult,	that	you’re	completely	immersed	right	now,	but	it’s	important.	You
have	to	learn	to	separate	yourself	from	your	character	and	the	best	time	to	do	that	is
when	it’s	hardest	to	do.	Anyone	can	enter	the	witnessing	mode	when	it’s	all	blue
skies,	the	trick	is	doing	it	when	black	clouds	are	rolling	in.	Look	at	this	pain	you’re
feeling.	Look	at	the	person	experiencing	the	pain	through	my	eyes	instead	of	yours.
Take	a	breath	and	do	it	now.”
	
She	takes	a	breath	and	releases	a	long	shuddering	sigh.	She	closes	her	eyes	and	I
turn	my	attention	away.	When	I	look	back,	little	Jolene	is	eying	me	with	the	half
smirk	of	someone	who	brought	a	gun	to	a	knife	fight.	That’s	a	good	look	to	have.
	
“Can	I	tell	you	why	I	came	here?”	she	asks.	“Why	I	wanted	to	see	you?”
	
“Can	I	tell	you?”	I	reply.	She	remains	motionless	for	a	second,	then	nods.
	
“You	want	someplace	to	go.	You	want	to	find	a	group	of	people	to	be	with.	You
want	to	land	somewhere,	to	be	part	of	something.	You	hope	that	there	is	such	a
thing.”
	

=== Page 71 ===
She’s	biting	her	bottom	lip	now	and	nodding	her	head.
	
“Something	around	Buddhism,	I	guess.	Something	in	California?”
	
She	nods	silently.
	
“Zen?”
	
Another	nod.
	
“You	made	a	wrong	turn,”	I	say.	“California’s	the	other	way.”
	
She	doesn’t	move.
	
“Or	maybe	you	already	knew	the	answer	and	you	didn’t	want	to	believe	it,	so	now
I’ll	say	it	for	you.	You’re	already	beyond	Buddhism.	Buddhism,	even	Zen,	would	be
a	step	backward	for	you,	and	there	are	no	backward	steps.	We	can	never	go	back,
it’s	not	an	option.	You	understand	that?”
	
She	nods.
	
“You’re	on	your	own,	kid.	You’re	already	further	out	than	Buddhism	goes.	You’re
further	out	than	anyone	can	go	with	you.	You	know	there’s	no	more	being	a	part	of
things	for	you	and	you	came	to	see	me	in	a	bit	of	a	panic,	looking	for	a	different
answer.	You	want	to	hook	up,	maybe	to	Buddhism,	maybe	to	some	bestselling
author	or	cool-groove	satsang	teacher.	Maybe	to	me.	Maybe	you	thought	I	could
catch	you,	reel	you	in,	make	it	all	solid	for	you	again,	you	think?”
	
She	sits	motionless,	head	down.
	
“You	had	firm	footing	and	you	started	losing	it	that	day	when	you	saw	the	cows	in
church.	Now	you’re	scrambling	to	find	it	again,	but	you	never	will.	You’re	floating
up	out	of	the	warm	muck	in	which	most	people	spend	their	lives.	That	muck	is	the
only	life	you’ve	ever	known	and	now	you’re	leaving	it	behind.	Very	scary.	Don’t
waste	time	feeling	bad	about	it,	everyone	panics	at	this	point.	You	can’t	not.	No	one
slips	gracefully	beneath	the	waves.	This	is	way	past	bravery	and	cowardice;	those
terms	mean	nothing	here.”
	
“Is	this	the	First	Step?”	she	asks.
	

=== Page 72 ===
“Yes,	 this	 is	 the	 First	 Step,	 which	 is	 really	 the	 last	 step.	 See	 that?	 Between
Damnedest	and	Spiritual	Autolysis	you	didn’t	need	me.	You	already	had	everything
you	needed.	You	could	have	saved	yourself	the	airfare.”
	
She	doesn’t	laugh	or	smile.	In	her	eyes	I	see	that	she	is	already	older	than	most
people	ever	get.
	
	
City	Lights
	
We	arrive	back	at	the	loft	worn	out	and	hungry.	I	grab	a	bite	and	lay	down	for	a	nap,
telling	Jolene	to	fend	for	herself.	She’s	leaving	early	in	the	morning	and	I	think
she’s	a	little	disappointed	to	discover	that	we’re	not	doing	a	nice	restaurant	or
theater	or	anything	special	on	her	last	night.	I	wake	up	from	my	nap	at	around	7:30
and	find	her	dozing	on	the	futon.	I	nudge	her	with	a	foot	and	she	opens	her	eyes.
	
“Hi,”	she	says.
	
“Hi,”	I	say	back.	“Get	ready,	we’re	going	out.”
	
She	rolls	up	onto	her	knees.	“Should	I	dress	up?”	she	asks	eagerly.
	
I	look	at	her	like	she’s	nuts.	“No,	anything	is	fine.”
	
“Oh,”	she	says,	disappointed.	“Okay.”
	
We	head	out	and	up	a	few	streets	where	it’s	easier	to	find	a	cab.	I	give	the	driver	a
street	address.	He	says,	“You	mean	the…”	and	I	say,	“make	it	the	Seaport,”	before
he	blurts	it	out.	A	few	minutes	later	we	emerge	from	the	financial	district	to	the	East
River	piers.	We	get	out	of	the	cab	near	the	Seaport	and	head	south	on	foot,	the	Twin
Towers	looming	large	above.	She	sees	a	sign	for	the	Staten	Island	Ferry.
	
“Are	we	gonna	ride	the	ferry?”	she	asks.
	
“Doesn’t	that	sound	like	fun?”
	
She	tries	to	sound	enthusiastic.	“Yeah!”
	
I	laugh	and	we	continue	walking.	I	stop	in	front	of	the	heliport.
	

=== Page 73 ===
“What’s	this?”	she	asks.
	
“What’s	it	look	like?”	I	ask.
	
“A	helicopter	place,”	she	says.
	
“That’s	what	it	is,	a	helicopter	place.”
	
“Yeah,	so?	What	are	we	doing	here?”	she	says.
	
I	borrow	a	line	from	Contact.	“Wanna	take	a	ride?”
	
Her	eyes	get	huge.
	
“No	way!”	She	wallops	me	a	good	one.
	
“Way.”
	
“No	way!!”	she	says	and	I	jump	back	before	the	next	walloping.
	
“Uh,	way.”
	
“Wow!	Really?	Where	are	we	going?”
	
“It’s	called	a	City	Lights	Tour.	We’re	just	going	to	fly	around	Manhattan.	Probably
from	here	to	the	Statue	of	Liberty,	up	the	Hudson,	hook	around	the	Bronx	and	down
the	East	River.	See	the	city,	the	bridges,	or,	you	know,	Jersey	and	Brooklyn	if	you
get	a	shitty	seat.”
	
She	darkens	a	few	degrees.
	
“A	shitty	seat?	How	many	people—?”
	
I	laugh.	“Just	you	and	me,	kid.	Now	this	is	a	pretty	romantic	thing,	so	I	don’t	want
you	getting	all	gooshy	on	me—”
	
She	pushes	me	and	then	gets	very	solemn.
	
“I	can’t	do	this,”	she	says	quietly.	“It’s	too	much.	This	must	cost	like	a	thousand
dollars.”

=== Page 74 ===
	
“Not	quite.	Anyway,	you’re	doing	me	the	favor.	I’ve	wanted	to	do	this	for	years,	but
not	alone.	You’re	doing	this	for	me	as	much	as	I’m	doing	it	for	you,	okay?”
	
“Really?”	she	says,	almost	pleading.
	
“Really.”
	
For	a	few	hundred	dollars	you	can	jump	out	of	an	airplane	two	miles	high	and
probably	live.	For	under	a	hundred	bucks	your	local	flight	instructor	will	take	you
up	in	a	Cessna	and	let	you	drive.	For	less	than	a	thousand	you	can	take	a	night	flight
over	one	of	the	world’s	great	cities	at	its	most	radiant	and	splendid	in	a	privately
chartered	 helicopter.	 Bungee	 jumping,	 supercoasters,	 whitewater	 rafting,	 at	 ten
times	the	price	these	experiences	would	be	among	the	greatest	bargains	one	can
strike	in	life;	the	most	memorable	and	cherished.	These	are	the	things	that	will	be
with	us	on	the	deathbed,	not	the	money	we	didn’t	spend.	The	cost	of	this	night	flight
isn’t	going	to	put	a	dent	in	my	lifestyle,	but	even	if	it	was	my	last	nickel,	to	what
better	use	could	I	possibly	put	it?
	
We	go	in.	I	leave	her	in	the	seating	area	while	I	handle	some	things	at	the	counter
and	hit	the	head.	I	return	and	we	go	back	outside	to	talk.	We	have	time	before
moonrise	so	we	go	for	a	stroll.
	
Time	to	give	Jolene	what	she	came	for.
	
“Within	the	context	of	your	personal	life,	of	your	future,	Jolene,	what	can	you	say
for	sure?”
	
She	knows	this	is	something	she’s	supposed	to	think	about	and	she	does.	She	takes
a	full	minute	before	she	answers.
	
“Well,	I’m	going	to	die,	I	guess.”
	
“You	guess?”
	
“No,	I	mean,	I	don’t	guess.	It	just	sounds	weird	to	say	it.”
	
“Say	what?”
	
“I’m	going	to	die.”

=== Page 75 ===
	
“There’s	a	line	in	
The	Mahabharata
,	Krishna	talking	to	Karna,	the	warrior	who	will
fight	Arjuna.	Krishna	is	telling	Karna,	in	essence,	that	Arjuna’s	victory	is	assured.”
	
“Yeah,	I	watched	it.”
	
“Krishna	 tells	 him,	 ‘Look,	 it’s	 spring,	 the	 buds	 are	 sweet,	 the	 water	 sparkles,
everyone	is	joyful.	We	are	going	to	die.’”
	
She	looks	at	me	for	a	long	moment,	wondering	where	this	is	going.	In	this	or	any
similar	conversation,	there	are	two	different	dynamics	at	work.	There’s	the	apparent
dynamic,	which	is	what	Jolene	sees	and	what	any	onlooker	would	see,	and	there’s
the	underlying	dynamic,	which	is	what	I	see	and	where	the	real	work	is	getting
done.	It’s	as	true	of	me	and	Jolene	standing	on	a	New	York	sidewalk	as	it	is	of	any
conversation	I	have	or	words	I	write.	The	person	who	appears	to	be	the	intended
recipient	is,	in	a	way,	just	an	agent,	a	go-between,	and	sometimes	an	unwitting	one.
	
It	looks	like	I’m	talking	to	Jolene,	but	I’m	really	talking	through	her.	I’m	speaking
past	the	shell	to	the	little	bastard	within.	(I	always	think	of	it	as	a	masculine	energy
regardless	of	the	host’s	gender.)	The	little	bastard	is	hidden	in	there,	deep	behind	the
eyes.	He’s	jumping	up	and	down,	waving	his	arms,	trying	to	get	my	attention.	He
doesn’t	know	exactly	what	he	wants	from	me,	but	he	thinks	I	know	and	he’s	right.
He	wants	what	any	revolutionary	plotting	a	violent	overthrow	wants;	weapons	and
intelligence.	Things	that	burn	and	destroy,	and	the	knowledge	to	aim	them	and	use
them.	The	real	thing	that’s	going	on	here	is	that	rebel	forces	have	contacted	me	for
aid	and	I	am	surreptitiously	providing	it.	I’m	happy	to	oblige	them	because	that’s
what	I	do;	support	rebellion.	I	don’t	incite	it,	I	don’t	have	to;	it	incites	itself.	Then,	if
it	happens	to	seek	me	out,	in	book	or	in	person,	I’m	able	to	provide	what	it	needs.	I
have	to	sugarcoat	it	a	bit	so	Jolene	can	swallow	it,	but	once	it’s	in	her	system,	the
little	bastard	can	digest	it	at	his	leisure.	It’s	the	same	in	conversation	as	it	is	in	the
books	I	write.	The	information	in	the	books	could	be	provided	in	a	much	drier	form
in	much	less	space	and	be	much	less	palatable.	I	doubt	I’ve	ever	expressed	an
original	thought	or	one	that	hasn’t	been	expressed	many	ways	many	times	before.
The	secret’s	in	the	sauce.
	
The	battle	that	is	brewing	within	her	won’t	be	between	the	little	bastard	and	Jolene,
as	it	may	appear,	but	between	the	little	bastard	and	Maya.	Maya,	on	this	battlefield,
will	be	represented	by	fear,	and	the	little	bastard	by	hate.	Fear	vs	Hate.	Fear	of	No-
Self	vs	Hatred	of	False-Self.	These	are	the	armies	facing	each	other	on	the	fields	of
Kurukshetra.	These	are	the	forces	between	which	Arjuna	collapses.	This	is	the	one

=== Page 76 ===
true	war	of	which	all	others	are	but	shadows,	and	for	which	all	other	conflict	is	but	a
metaphor.
	
In	the	short	term,	Maya	almost	always	crushes	the	rebellion.	By	my	estimate,	her
win/loss	ratio	is	better	than	100,000,000:1.	By	using	her	vast	array	of	tricks	and
treats	to	buy,	charm,	misdirect,	or	distract	potential	rebels,	she	keeps	them	too
happy,	sad,	engrossed	or	content	to	move,	easily	and	effectively	precluding	an
uprising	before	it	gets	much	past	the	stage	of	mild	discontent.	In	the	long	term,
however,	the	overthrow	of	Maya	is	certain.	Truth	is	and	delusion	isn’t.	Ultimately,
duality	is	an	artificial	construct	and	when	it’s	gone,	truth	is	what	remains.	Viewed
this	way,	the	idea	that	Maya	is	evil,	that	delusion	is	negative,	that	the	dreamstate	is	a
prison,	or	that	the	dualistic	universe	is	anything	other	than	the	grandest	and	most
wonderful	of	all	blessings	is	laughably	absurd.	Why	hate	Maya?	Where	would	you
be	without	her?
	
Jolene	herself	is	only	vaguely	aware	that	this	battle	brews	within	her.	In	a	way,	she’s
just	an	innocent	bystander	caught	between	two	massing	armies.	Of	course,	the
rebels	are	just	a	small	band	of	peasants	with	pitchforks	at	this	stage,	but	they’re
getting	their	act	together.	They’ve	convinced	Jolene	to	make	this	trip	to	see	me,	and
they’ve	managed	to	get	the	attention	of	a	well-placed	sympathizer.	Not	bad.
	
Of	course,	you	can	just	say	that	the	little	bastard	is	a	part	of	Jolene.	That’s	true.	But
you	can	also	say	that	the	little	bastard	will	be	the	death	of	Jolene.	That’s	true	too.
	
	
Death	&	Discrimination
	
“You	and	I,	Jolene,	we’re	about	to	get	on	a	helicopter;	a	flying	deathtrap.	I	should
tell	you,	the	pilot	is	drunk	and	grossly	overweight.	His	wife	just	left	him	and	took
the	kids.	I	saw	him	blubbering	in	the	bathroom,	taking	pills.”	She	giggles.	“We
could	be	dead	a	few	minutes	from	now.	You	remember	I	mentioned	in	the	book
some	advice	I	gave	a	guy	from	a	Billy	Jack	movie?”
	
“
The	Trial	of	Billy	Jack,”
	she	corrects	me.	“I	saw	that	too.	If	you	knew	you	were
going	to	die	tomorrow,	how	much	would	this	really	matter?	That	was	the	question.”
	
“That’s	 absolution.	 Pre-absolution.	 That’s	 what	 death	 is,	 guaranteed	 absolution;
freedom	and	forgiveness	all	in	one.	If	you	understand	the	fact	of	your	own	death,
that	it’s	always	here	with	you	and	that	it’s	a	certainty,	then	you’re	free.	That’s
liberation;	knowing	that	nothing	is	yours	or	can	be	yours,	knowing	that	you	have

=== Page 77 ===
nothing	to	lose.	Other	people	push	death	away,	deny	it,	but	we	don’t	have	that
luxury.	We	have	to	pull	death	close,	embrace	it,	carry	it	in	our	hearts	and	minds.	I
don’t	mean	like	a	college	kid	getting	stoned	and	having	a	one-night	stand	with
existentialism,	I	mean	like	something	you	carry	in	your	pocket	and	always	have	one
hand	on.	There	are	two	kinds	of	people	in	the	world,	make-believe	people	and
serious	people.	You’re	a	serious	person	Jolene,	that’s	what	you’re	becoming.	You’re
in	the	game	now	and	you	have	to	play	by	the	rules.”
	
“You	always	say	that;	a	serious	person.	What	does	that	mean?”
	
“Focus.	It’s	all	about	focus.	You	have	to	learn	to	be	an	utter	failure	in	ninety-nine
percent	of	your	life.	You	can	accept	that	because	you’re	not	a	failure	in	the	one	part
that	matters.	You	have	to	jettison	all	sub-identities.	Be	a	bad	person,	a	bad	citizen.
Stop	shaping	yourself	to	the	world.	Shape	yourself	to	your	task	and	let	the	world
despise	you	or,	preferably,	forget	about	you.	You	want	to	be	a	good	citizen?	Vote?
Study	issues?”
	
She	ponders	and	nods.
	
“Fuck	it.	Be	a	crappy	citizen.	Better,	don’t	be	a	citizen	at	all.	Simply	abandon	that
identity.	 Chop	 it	 off.	 You	 want	 to	 be	 a	 good	 daughter?	 Friend?	 Sister?	 Wife
someday?	Mother?	Forget	it.	Let	it	all	go.	Simply	cut	away	all	these	anchors.	All
opinions	you	have	of	yourself	are	like	the	timbers	of	a	false	structure.	All	must	go.
All	will	go.	The	process	has	begun.	The	less	you	resist,	the	easier	it	will	be.”
	
She	seems	overwhelmed	by	this,	as	well	she	should.	It’s	seldom	advisable	to	look
more	 than	 one	 step	 ahead.	 Even	 the	 step	 after	 the	 next	 will	 always	 appear
ridiculously	impossible.	But	right	now	Jolene	is	staring	at	the	First	Step	and	the	fact
that	she	hasn’t	been	rendered	catatonic	by	the	view	is	a	testament	to	her	honesty	and
resolve.	As	I’ve	pointed	out	before,	this	is	where	people	can	break.
	
“This	is	where	it’s	all	going	anyway.	You	have	this	whole	life;	your	home	and	your
schools	and	community	and	all	that,	everything	you’ve	done,	everything	you	are,
the	future	that	was	laid	out	before	you,	but	all	that	has	to	be	released	for	you	to	go
on.	And	it	will	be.	All	your	choices	have	already	been	made.	You	don’t	choose
whether	to	let	it	all	go,	only	whether	or	not	to	struggle	against	the	process,	and	the
thing	that	makes	an	easier	transition	possible	is	death.	These	false	layers	are	like
your	skin.	It	can	be	torn	away	slowly,	with	excruciating	pain,	or	you	can	just	slough
it	off	like	a	snake,	layer	after	layer,	just	letting	it	all	fall	away.	The	way	to	do	that,	to

=== Page 78 ===
allow	the	process	rather	than	battle	it,	is	to	embrace	your	own	death.	Keep	one	hand
on	your	death	and	fight	your	battles	with	the	other.”
	
“I	don’t	have	any	choice	in	all	this?	I	don’t	have	any	freedom?”
	
“Freedom?	I	don’t	know	what	that	means;	it’s	just	a	concept	word.	Freedom	isn’t	a
thing	itself,	it’s	an	incomplete	idea.	You	have	to	be	free	from	something.	What	do
you	want	to	be	free	from?”
	
“How	about	this	whole	thing?	This	whole	process?	What	if	I	don’t	want	to	do	it?
What	if	I	just	want	to	make	the	whole	thing	stop	and	go	back	to	having	a	normal
life?”
	
I	pause	to	give	her	time	to	breathe.
	
“Okay.”
	
“Okay?	What	does	okay	mean?”
	
“It	means	okay.	Store	this	conversation	for	later.	I’m	not	your	teacher,	you	know.
I’m	 someone	 just	 like	 you,	 except	 I’ve	 already	 finished	 something	 you’re	 just
starting.	If	you	want	to	learn	about	trying	to	turn	back,	try	to	turn	back.”
	
She	releases	a	mighty	sigh.	“I	don’t	know	what	I	want.”
	
“You	want	to	attach,”	I	tell	her.	“That’s	the	urge	that	brought	you	here.	You	want	to
join	up	with	people,	a	group,	be	a	part	of	something,	something	big	and	safe	and
respectable.	 You	 sense	 yourself	 spinning	 off	 into	 oblivion	 and	 you’re	 clawing
desperately	to	grab	ahold	of	something.	This	is	a	very	powerful	urge	and	pretty
much	everyone	succumbs	to	it.	That’s	the	big	trap,	the	one	that	pulls	us	in	and
spares	us	from	the	paradigm	shift,	the	point	of	no	return,	the	First	Step.	Does	this	all
sound	right	to	you?”
	
“I	guess.”
	
I	wait.
	
“Yes.”
	

=== Page 79 ===
This	was	touched	upon	in	Damnedest.	We’re	all	treading	water	in	a	shoreless	sea
and	we	huddle	together	into	groups	to	convince	ourselves	that	our	situation	is	other
than	it	is.	That’s	make-believe.	Serious	people	want	to	confront	the	real	situation.
To	do	that	they	have	to	leave	the	group	and	stop	treading	water,	surrender	to	the
inevitable	rather	than	live	a	life	of	pointless	struggle.	They	have	to	go	off	by
themselves	and	allow	themselves	to	sink.	This	is	the	point	no	one	goes	beyond.	This
is	what	everyone	lives	in	denial	of;	what	they	must,	at	all	costs,	stay	turned	away
from.
	
The	emperor	has	no	clothes.	Obviously.	Anyone	who	opens	their	eyes	and	looks
will	see.	But	for	this	whole	dreamstate	deal	to	work,	people	have	to	see	clothes.	It
doesn’t	matter	what	the	clothes	look	like,	but	they	can’t	see	naked.	This	is	what
Maya	must	work	against;	the	plain	truth.	What	does	she	have	to	do	to	keep	people
from	seeing	the	obvious?
	
Baffle	them	with	bullshit.
	
Judeo-Christian	 bullshit,	 Hindu	 bullshit,	 Buddhist	 bullshit,	 New	 Age	 bullshit,
they’re	all	just	varieties	of	agnosticism	and	they	all	result	in	exactly	same	thing:
Spiritual	Embafflement.
	
It’s	that	simple.	The	emperor	has	no	clothes.	It’s	all	just	make-believe.	When	we
want	to	stop	playing	make-believe,	we	become	serious	people.	Of	course,	everyone
sinks	alone	anyway,	but	the	serious	person	can’t	stand	the	lie	of	pretending	the	sea
isn’t	shoreless	or	that	the	darkness	isn’t	absolute	or	that	death	isn’t	always	a	breath
away.	The	urge	to	attach	is	the	survival	urge;	the	urge	not	to	drown,	not	to	sink	into
the	blackness.
	
I	stop	walking	and	look	at	her.
	
“It’s	natural	to	panic,”	I	say,	“and	that’s	what	you’re	doing	now.	That’s	what	all	this
trying	to	hook	up	is	about.	You’re	in	a	life	or	death	struggle	to	survive	and	my	job	is
to	help	you	die.”
	
“Is	that	what	you’ve	been	doing?	Helping	me	die?”
	
“Indirectly.	I’ve	been	trying	to	help	you	grab	onto	something	so	that	you	can	see	for
yourself	that	it	can’t	be	done.	The	process	works,	it	doesn’t	need	me	or	anyone	else.
Now	you’re	starting	to	see	that	it’s	no	longer	possible	to	attach.	You’re	chasing
mirages	 in	 a	 desert.	 Everything	 you	 try	 to	 grab	 at	 disappears.	 You	 can’t	 grab

=== Page 80 ===
anything	because	there’s	nothing	to	grab.	Maybe	you	think	you	can	grab	onto	me,
but	that	won’t	work	either.	You	want	a	friend?	A	companion?	Let	death	be	your
companion.	That’s	the	one	thing	you	really	have,	the	one	thing	that’s	really	yours,
that	no	one	can	take	away.”
	
Her	expression	is	taut,	her	eyes	locked	on	mine.	No	teary	eyes	or	trembling	lips.	No
young	girl	pout	or	smirk.	A	warrior	is	emerging.	There	will	soon	be	a	power	shift	in
Jolene.	Rebel	forces	will	overthrow	the	old	regime.	A	new	constitution	will	be
imposed	and	the	excesses	and	frivolities	of	the	make-believe	regime	will	be	swept
away.	A	new	government	will	assume	control	and	impose	martial	law	and	a	wartime
constitution	that	has	no	place	for	anything	but	the	machinery	of	destruction.	Identity
will	wither.	Preferences	will	fade.	Relationships	will	be	abandoned.	Love	itself	will
be	forgotten.	That’s	the	First	Step	and,	for	Jolene,	it’s	coming	soon.
	
“You’re	going	to	tough	places.	You’re	in	for	a	whole	different	type	of	life	than	you
see	people	living	around	you.	You’re	getting	a	glimpse	now	of	what	loneliness
looks	like—no,	not	loneliness,	aloneness—and	there’s	plenty	more	ahead.	But	this
too	shall	pass.”
	
She	looks	down	and	nods.	“This	too	shall	pass,”	she	repeats.
	
“The	pain	of	the	transition	will	pass,	not	the	aloneness.	The	aloneness	actually
becomes	very	comfortable.”
	
I	lift	her	chin.	“You	have	to	go	beyond	the	place	where	death	is	a	morbid	and	evil
thing.	It’s	about	liberation,	not	at	the	end	of	life,	but	during,	when	it	matters.	Now.
Look	up.	Look	at	me.	I	am	happy	to	die	at	any	time.	Makes	no	difference	to	me.
Now,	later,	whatever.	I	love	the	fact	of	my	death;	it’s	what	has	made	my	life
possible.	It’s	how	I’ve	known	what	my	life	was	and	what	to	do	with	it.	If	I	knew
that	helicopter	was	going	to	crash	tonight	I’d	step	aboard	with	a	joyous	and	grateful
heart.”
	
We	walk	for	awhile	in	silence.	This	is	heavy	stuff	to	be	sharing	with	a	teenager	who
has	her	whole	life	ahead	of	her	and	shouldn’t	have	to	even	consider	her	own
mortality	for	many	decades,	but	Jolene	isn’t	normal.	She’s	getting	in	on	the	game,
and	the	game	has	rules.
	
“Your	life	will	be	a	war,”	I	tell	her	in	a	soft	tone.	“It	already	is.	People	hate	war
because	they	fear	death,	but	death	is	your	best	and	most	certain	friend.	Not	me,	not
the	Tibetans	or	the	Japanese	or	some	pop	guru	or	coffeehouse	mystic-in-training.

=== Page 81 ===
This	is	what	you	came	here	to	learn.	It	seems	strange	to	lecture	a	beautiful	young
girl	 about	 death,	 but	 you’re	 not	 just	 a	 beautiful	 young	 girl,	 are	 you?	 You’re
something	else.	That’s	what	you’re	finding	out	now,	isn’t	it?”
	
“I	don’t	think	I	can	really	do	it.”
	
“You	are	doing	it.	This	is	it.	One	step	at	a	time.”
	
“I’m	scared,”	she	says.
	
“Of	what?”
	
She	thinks	about	it.	“I	don’t	know.”
	
“Good.	Find	out.	That’s	how	you	know	where	to	go.	Follow	the	fear.	Go	into	it	and
light	it	up.	Inside	your	fear	is	the	next	door,	the	next	thing	holding	you	in.	Let	fear
be	your	guide.”
	
She	wraps	herself	around	my	arm	as	we	continue	to	walk.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
We	go	in	and	sign	some	stuff	as	they	crank	up	the	comfortable	executive	chopper
outside	on	the	pad.	Jolene	sees	that	the	pilot	is	quite	trim,	handsome	and	appears
emotionally	stable.	She’s	thrilled	by	everything,	which	makes	it	thrilling	for	me.
When	 we’re	 standing	 outside	 waiting	 to	 be	 waved	 aboard,	 Jolene	 is	 hanging
comfortably	on	my	arm.	She	tiptoes	up	and	speaks	in	my	ear.	“It’s	such	a	pretty
night,”	she	says.	“I	hope	we	don’t	crash.”
	
I	laugh	and	smile	down	at	her.
	
“No	way	you’re	getting	off	that	easy.”
	
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
	
Bonus	Content	from

=== Page 82 ===
Spiritual	Warfare
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
