# I, Witness

I,	Witness
	
With	thinking	we	may	be	beside	ourselves	in	a	sane	sense.	By	a	conscious	effort	of
the	mind	we	can	stand	aloof	from	actions	and	their	consequences;	and	all	things,
good	and	bad,	go	by	us	like	a	torrent.	We	are	not	wholly	involved	in	Nature.	I	may
be	either	the	driftwood	in	the	stream,	or	Indra	in	the	sky	looking	down	on	it.	I	may
be	affected	by	a	theatrical	exhibition;	on	the	other	hand,	I	may	not	be	affected	by	an
actual	event	which	appears	to	concern	me	much	more.	I	only	know	myself	as	a
human	entity;	the	scene,	so	to	speak,	of	thoughts	and	affections;	and	am	sensible	of
a	certain	doubleness	by	which	I	can	stand	as	remote	from	myself	as	from	another.
However	intense	my	experience,	I	am	conscious	of	the	presence	and	criticism	of	a
part	of	me,	which,	as	it	were,	is	not	a	part	of	me,	but	spectator,	sharing	no
experience,	but	taking	note	of	it,	and	that	is	no	more	I	than	it	is	you.	When	the	play,
it	may	be	the	tragedy,	of	life	is	over,	the	spectator	goes	his	way.	It	was	a	kind	of
fiction,	a	work	of	the	imagination	only,	so	far	as	he	was	concerned.
	
Henry	David	Thoreau
	
	
It’s	early	evening
,	still	light.	Sheila,	my	hard-up-for-work	local	ex-pat	slash	retired
Social	Studies	teacher	slash	affordable	personal	assistant	slash	humorless	Christian
lady,	has	gone	off	to	make	her	husband	some	dinner.	A	couple	of	other	people	have
come	and	gone.	The	place	is	settling	into	its	evening	groove.
	
Lisa	and	Maggie	appear,	as	they	often	do	around	this	time.	We	all	say	our	hellos	and
I	keep	working	at	my	laptop.	Lisa	relaxes	out	by	the	pool	and	Maggie	takes	a	seat	at
the	table	with	me.	She	starts	pulling	things	out	of	her	student’s	backpack;	water
bottle,	notebook,	pen.	She	goes	to	work	quietly	and	no	one	says	anything	for	half	an
hour	when	Maggie	asks	a	question.
	
“Can	I	have	a	technique?”
	
I	look	up.
	

=== Page 83 ===
“You	don’t	like	the	autolysis?”	I	ask.
	
“Yeah,	I’m	trying	to	do	that.	I	have	an	online	diary	where	I	try	to	do	spiritual	stuff.	I
don’t	think	my	class	will	be	too	thrilled	with	a	diary,	though.	Got	any	others?”
	
“Techniques?”
	
“Yeah.”
	
I’ve	been	waiting	for	someone	to	say	something	so	I	could	take	a	break.	I	save	my
work	and	sit	back.	Maggie	and	I	have	gotten	the	hang	of	each	other	in	the	last
month.	She’s	taken	several	cracks	at	trying	to	interview	me,	but	it	hasn’t	been	going
well.	All	her	questions	manage	to	do	is	demonstrate	that	they	don’t	really	apply	to
me.	That’s	interesting	for	the	first	few,	but	when	it	turns	out	that	the	answer	to	every
question	isn’t	an	answer	but	an	explanation	of	why	the	question	doesn’t	apply,	it
gets	tedious	for	everyone.	Other	questions	would	require	such	long-winded	answers
and	defining	of	terms	as	to	not	be	worth	the	bother.	My	most	common	answer	is
“Try	the	next	one.”	She	has	stuck	with	it	though,	and	keeps	coming	back	to	try	a
different	approach.	She	gets	half	an	hour	a	week	for	this	activity	and,	as	promised,
her	mom,	Lisa,	and	her	grandpa,	Frank,	help	her,	but	so	far	I	don’t	think	she	has
anything	more	exciting	for	her	school	report	than	her	online	autolysis	diary.
	
The	questions	they’ve	come	up	with	so	far	have	been	stock	questions	from	a	variety
of	standard	personality	tests	designed	to	determine	whether	the	respondents	were
depressed,	employable,	addicted,	and	so	forth.	I’ll	provide	a	few	short	samples	here
to	illustrate:
	
Q:	When	you	have	disagreements	with	people,	do	you	raise	your	voice?
	
A:	I	hope	not.	I	live	in	a	state	of	profound	disagreement	with	everyone	about
everything.	I’d	never	stop	screaming.
	
Q:	Do	you	consciously	avoid	people	who	have	problems?
	
A:	Ego	is	the	only	problem	I	recognize	as	such,	and	yes,	I	consciously	avoid	people
who	have	it.
	
Q:	Are	you	proud	of	your	accomplishments?
	

=== Page 84 ===
A:	I	don’t	possess	the	thing	that	experiences	pride.	I’m	satisfied	that	I’ve	performed
my	function	adequately,	that’s	about	it.
	
Q:	Is	there	a	private	side	to	your	thoughts	that	you	don’t	generally	share	with
others?
	
A:	It’s	not	a	side	I	don’t	share	but	the	fuller	natural	expression.	The	awakened	state
could	easily	be	misinterpreted	as	psychotic,	monstrous,	or	evil,	especially	by	the
lazier-minded	 of	 observers.	 The	 real	 monster	 in	 the	 sleeping	 dreamstate	 is	 the
heretic,	so	the	key	to	longevity	in	this	business	is	not	inciting	the	gentle	townsfolk
to	take	up	torches	and	pitchforks	against	you.
	
Q:	Do	you	always	get	your	way?	Sometimes?	Never?
	
A:	Always.	How	things	go	is	how	I	want	them	to	go	and	how	I	want	them	to	go	is
how	they	go.	I	am	in	alignment.
	
Q:	Do	you	like	being	you?
	
A:	I	wouldn’t	if	I	was,	but	I’m	not	so	I	do.
	
There	 were	 dozens	 of	 questions,	 some	 of	 which	 provoked	 long,	 circuitous
responses,	 others	 of	 which	 had	 to	 be	 rejected	 because	 they	 were	 so	 distinctly
inapplicable.	A	few	were	pretty	good,	but	what	it	all	mostly	amounted	to	was	an	in-
depth	look	at	the	awakened	state	and	there’s	no	point	in	detailing	that	to	any	great
degree.	 This	 is	 a	 journey	 to	 be	 taken,	 not	 studied.	 Having	 a	 well-informed
understanding	of	what	fire	looks	and	feels	like	is	kind	of	silly	when	you	can	just	see
it	and	feel	it	for	yourself.
	
I	return	to	Maggie’s	request	for	a	technique.
	
“How	about	witnessing?”	I	ask	her.
	
“Okay,”	she	writes	the	word	down	and	looks	up.	“Witnessing	what?”
	
“Yourself.”
	
“Okay,	how	do	I	do	that?”
	

=== Page 85 ===
“It’s	what	you’re	doing	right	now.	You’re	witnessing	me,	right?	You’re	observing
my	external	character.”
	
“Um,	yes,	I	guess	so.”
	
“Now	do	the	same	thing	but	with	yourself	instead	of	me.”
	
“But	I	can’t	see	me.”
	
“You	can	see	you	from	the	other	side,	the	inside.	Best	seat	in	the	house.”
	
“Oh,”	she	says,	sounding	a	bit	unthrilled.	“Why	is	witnessing	good?”
	
“Is	this	for	your	class	or	for	you?”
	
“I	don’t	know.	Maybe	both.	I	think	me.”
	
“Okay.	Ultimately,	the	only	spiritual	practice	is	observation;	seeing	things	the	way
they	really	are.	That’s	what	Spiritual	Autolysis	is;	a	tool	to	help	us	do	that,	to	see
more	clearly,	to	use	our	brains	the	best	we	can.	In	witnessing,	you	want	to	take	a
step	back	from	yourself	so	you’re	not	just	living	your	life,	you’re	also	observing	it.
Not	in	reflection,	like	a	diary,	but	as	it’s	happening;	in	real	time.	Like	right	now,	I’m
sitting	here	talking	with	you,	but	I’m	also	in	this	witnessing	mode	of	impartial
observer.	I	am	not	fully	in	character,	I’m	also	an	audience	member.	I’m	aware	that
I’m	 acting	 on	 a	 stage	 and	 I	 am,	 somewhat	 disinterestedly,	 monitoring	 my
performance.”
	
She	looks	confused	but	eager.
	
“How	do	I	do	it?”	she	asks.
	
“Well,	in	a	way,	you’re	already	doing	it,	except	your	witness	is	kind	of	unfocused.
She’s	bored,	hungry,	aggravated,	muffled.	You	want	to	bring	her	into	focus,	sit	her
down	and	have	her	pay	attention.”
	
“Her?	Her	who?”
	
“The	little	voice	in	the	back	of	your	mind.	You	know	what	it’s	like	when	you’re
bored,	and	in	the	back	of	your	mind	you’re	thinking	about	something	else?	You’re
not	fully	present,	your	mind	is	somewhere	else;	wandering,	daydreaming.”

=== Page 86 ===
	
“Yes,	I	do	that	all	the	time.”
	
“You’re	not	doing	it	now,	I	hope.”
	
She	giggles.	“No	sir.”
	
“Would	you	tell	me	if	you	were?”
	
She	starts	to	answer	with	an	automatic	denial	but	bites	her	lip	instead.
	
“Maybe	not,”	she	says.
	
“Good.	There	are	two	kinds	of	honesty;	honesty	with	other	people	and	honesty	with
yourself.	 They’re	 separate	 and	 unrelated	 issues.	 Do	 what	 you	 want	 with	 other
people,	but	make	a	special	point	of	trying	to	be	honest	with	yourself.	Okay?”
	
“Okay.”
	
“Daydreaming	is	a	very	good	word	for	it	because	it	suggests	that	we’re	asleep	while
we’re	awake,	which	is	exactly	the	point.	We	want	to	transfer	our	primary	awareness
out	of	the	character	we’re	playing	and	into	the	actor	that’s	playing	the	character.	We
want	to	accentuate	that	distinction	to	help	us	stop	blending	the	character	we	play
with	the	actor	playing	the	character.	We	want	to	take	up	primary	residence	in	the
actor	instead	of	the	character	we’re	portraying.	Does	that	make	sense?”
	
“I	don’t	know.	You	mean	like	being	self-conscious	all	the	time?”
	
“Yes,	but	in	an	impartial	sense,	not	in	a	judgmental	sense.	When	you	have	internal
voices	 holding	 imaginary	 conversations	 or	 worrying	 that	 you	 wore	 the	 wrong
blouse,	those	are	character	elements	too.	The	actor	can	just	sit	back	and	watch	all
that.	In	this	way	you	can	observe	yourself	just	like	you	observe	anyone	else,	except
with	a	better	view.”
	
“I’m	not	sure	I	can	do	that.”
	
“Of	course	you	can,	it	just	sounds	weird.	There’s	nothing	to	it	except	observation,
awareness,	vigilance.	Wakefulness.	First	you	learn	to	do	it,	to	have	this	detached
awareness;	you	do	it	consciously,	a	little	at	a	time,	just	to	get	the	hang	of	it.	Practice
witnessing	 other	 people	 to	 get	 the	 idea.	 Watch	 them,	 wonder	 about	 them,

=== Page 87 ===
deconstruct	and	reverse-engineer	them,	then	just	watch	yourself	the	way	you’ve
been	watching	others.	Then	you	start	doing	it	more	and	more	until	it	becomes
second	nature	and	you’re	almost	always	in	the	witnessing	mode	and	you	see	your
own	character	from	the	same	impersonal	perspective	as	you	see	other	people.”
	
“All	the	time?”
	
“Yes,	but	not	like	a	conscious	effort;	more	like	a	new	way	of	being,	like	always
being	present.	Most	people	you	see	are	just	sleepwalking	through	their	roles,	absent
from	their	own	lives.	They’re	fully	in	character	and	don’t	know	any	other	way.”
	
“Like	straw	dogs?”	she	asks.	“Like	in	the	first	book?”
	
“Exactly,	this	is	how	you	make	that	transition	to	being	in	the	world	but	not	of	the
world,	starting	right	now.	Most	people	never	make	the	distinction	between	actor	and
character.	You	can	see	them,	you	can	look	at	people	and	tell.	If	I	would	have	met
your	mom	a	few	years	ago,	before	her	change	started,	I	would	have	just	seen	her
character.	Now	I	look	at	her	and	I	see	the	person	behind	the	character.	It	doesn’t
mean	she’s	enlightened	or	even	fully	awake	within	the	dreamstate,	it	means	that
she’s	present.”	I	address	myself	to	Lisa,	out	on	the	pool	deck.	“Would	you	agree
with	that?”
	
“Yes,”	she	says.
	
“Understand?”	I	ask	Maggie.
	
“A	little,”	she	says.
	
“By	living	unconsciously,	we	abdicate	our	personal	sovereignty.	That	means	we
give	 responsibility	 for	 ourselves	 away	 to	 other	 people;	 to	 parents	 and	 doctors,
priests	and	gurus,	politicians	and	corporations.	We	institutionalize	ourselves.	We
live	 without	 awareness,	 and	 that’s	 the	 breeding	 ground	 of	 all	 bad	 habits	 and
addictive	behaviors.	When	we	eat	without	awareness,	we	eat	too	much	of	the	wrong
things	and	get	fat	and	unhealthy.	When	we	shop	and	spend	without	awareness,	we
dig	ourselves	into	a	financial	hole	we	might	be	in	for	the	rest	of	our	lives.	We
mindlessly	plop	our	kids	down	in	front	of	a	game	console	or	a	TV	and	the	next	time
we	look	they’re	diabetic	little	blimps.”
	
Maggie	giggles.
	

=== Page 88 ===
“Who’s	to	blame	for	weak,	fat	children?	Unconscious	parents.	Who’s	to	blame	for
unconscious	parents?	Unconscious	parents.	This	cycle	of	unconsciousness	is	deeply
established	 and	 breaking	 the	 cycle,	 as	 your	 mother	 can	 tell	 you,	 can	 be
extraordinarily	difficult.	That’s	what	she	did	when	she	uprooted	you	from	your	old
life;	she	broke	the	cycle.	That’s	a	very	brave	and	difficult	thing	to	do.	We	bury
ourselves	alive	and	if	we	want	to	get	our	lives	back	we	have	to	dig	ourselves	out.
That’s	what	your	mom	is	doing;	digging	herself	out,	breaking	the	cycle.”
	
“Is	mom	going	to	be	enlightened?”
	
“No,	she’s	going	to	be	something	much	better.”
	
She	takes	her	notes	and	stares	at	them	for	a	moment.
	
“Witnessing	sounds	pretty	interesting,	I	guess,”	Maggie	says,	“but	what	does	it
actually	do	for	me?”
	
“Good	girl,	good	question.	First,	it	gets	you	into	the	habit	of	being	alert	and	present
in	your	life,	which	is	a	very	good	habit	to	develop.	If	you	don’t	want	to	sleep	your
life	away	like	most	people	do,	you	have	to	train	yourself	to	wakefulness.	Vigilance
is	the	key.	You	should	be	shifting	from	character	to	actor	many	times	every	hour,	in
all	types	of	situations,	so	that	it	happens	smoothly	and	easily	and	doesn’t	detract
from	your	performance.”
	
Maggie	takes	notes	and	asks	for	clarification	now	and	then.	I	wait	and	proceed
when	she’s	ready.
	
“Second,”	I	say,	“it	trains	you	to	disidentify	from	the	character	you’re	playing.
There’s	a	you	behind	the	character	you	project	out	into	the	world,	and	you	can’t
make	any	progress	as	long	as	you	identify	with	your	stage	persona.	You’re	an	actor
playing	a	character	on	a	stage.	That’s	what	the	Bhagavad-Gita	is	all	about.”
	
“Like	you	talk	about	in	your	books,”	she	says.
	
“That’s	right.	Arjuna	forgot	he	was	just	an	actor	playing	a	character	in	a	play,	and
he	 started	 panicking	 because	 he	 couldn’t	 fulfill	 his	 role.	 Krishna	 was	 like	 the
director	and	he	had	to	come	out	on	stage	and	remind	Arjuna	what	was	going	on,
that	he’s	really	just	an	actor	playing	a	part.”
	
“Lighten	up,	Arjuna,”	she	says	with	a	shy	smile.

=== Page 89 ===
	
“That’s	right.	Arjuna	was	freaking	out.	Krishna	told	him	to	stop	being	such	a	baby.
He	told	Arjuna	to	stand	up	and	fight,	but	what	that	really	means	is	open	your	eyes
and	look.	Krishna	turned	up	the	house	lights	to	show	Arjuna	it	was	all	just	a	play	in
a	theater	so	Arjuna	would	stop	whining	and	play	his	role,	which	he	did,	okay?”
	
“Okay.”
	
“The	third	thing	about	witnessing,	the	most	important	part	and	the	thing	that	most
people	don’t	seem	to	understand,	is	that	you	have	to	take	it	further	than	just	one	step
back.	You	have	to	keep	going	with	it.	It’s	not	a	passive	thing,	like	you	just	sit	back
and	observe.	You	don’t	just	observe	your	character,	you	deconstruct	it.	You	have	to
be	aggressive	about	it.	This	is	a	way	of	simulating	the	enlightened	perspective,
which	would	be	useful	to	anyone	who	wants	to	wake	themselves	up	from	the
dreamstate	instead	of	just	in	it.”
	
She	starts	to	write	and	stops	and	looks	up	at	me.
	
“I	have	no	idea	what	you	just	said,”	she	says.
	
“Okay,	so	we’ve	talked	about	being	awake	and	being	asleep,	right?	The	Dreamstate
Paradigm	and	the	Awakened	Paradigm?”
	
“Yes.”
	
“And	we	talked	about	stepping	back	from	your	character,	observing	the	play	rather
than	being	swept	up	in	it,	right?”
	
“Yes.”
	
“So,	what	would	it	be	like	to	take	another	step	back?”
	
“I	don’t	understand.	How	would	I	take	another	step	back?”
	
“Well,	describe	the	person	you	are.	The	actor,	not	the	character.”
	
“I	don’t	know,”	she	says.	“I’m	a	girl,	I’m	thirteen,	I’m	American.”
	
“Keep	going.”
	

=== Page 90 ===
“Where?”
	
“You’re	a	human	being,	right?	You’re	alive,	conscious,	subject	to	physical	laws.
You	exist	somewhere	specific	in	time	and	space.	You’re	living	on	a	little	planet	in	a
big	galaxy	in	an	infinite	universe.	These	are	all	aspects	of	who	you	believe	yourself
to	be;	these	are	your	beliefs.	So	are	all	the	things	you	think	you’re	not;	you’re	not
this	table,	but	you	believe	there	is	a	table.	You’re	not	this	air,	you’re	not	me,	you’re
not	this	solar	system.	That’s	part	of	the	way	you	define	yourself	as	well;	as	this,	not
that.”
	
“Are	you	saying	I	am	this	table?”
	
“No,	 I’m	 saying	 you’re	 saying	 you’re	 not.	 You	 believe	 you	 and	 the	 table	 are
different	things.”
	
“Aren’t	we?”
	
“I	don’t	know,	are	you?”
	
She	frowns	at	me.
	
“Oh	boy,”	she	says,	tongue	protruding	in	thought.	“Okay,	hold	on	a	second,”	she
rapidly	scribbles	her	notes.
	
“You	said	you’re	a	girl,”	I	continue,	“but	is	that	true	or	is	it	just	a	facet	of	your	role?
You	can	step	back	from	your	gender	and	your	nationality	and	your	species	and
observe	it	the	same	way	we	talked	about	doing	with	your	character.”
	
“I	can?”
	
“Everything	you	think	you	know	about	yourself,	no	matter	how	real	or	true	it	might
seem,	is	just	another	layer	of	costume.	This	is	where	we	start	dismantling	our	true
belief	system.	Belief	isn’t	just	about	God	and	afterlife,	it’s	about	everything	we
think	we	know	is	true.	Everything	we	know,	no	matter	how	sure	we	are,	is	really
just	belief,	and	all	beliefs	are	self-limiting	and	serve	to	reduce	the	truly	infinite	to
the	falsely	finite.”
	
She	gets	that	down	word	for	word.
	
“Oh	boy,”	she	frowns,	“and	what’s	wrong	with	that	again?”

=== Page 91 ===
	
“I	didn’t	say	there	was	anything	wrong	with	it.”
	
“But	none	of	it	is	true,	like	where	we	are	in	time	and	space	and	everything?”
	
“Not	just	where	you	are	in	time	and	space,	but	time	and	space	themselves,	and
duality	and	causality	and	destiny	and	memory	and	anything	else	you	can	think	of.
These	are	the	things	you	believe	are	true,	elements	of	the	Dreamstate	Paradigm,	and
you	can	use	this	witnessing	process	to	shake	that	belief	loose,	get	free	of	it.	Step
back	from	the	year,	the	decade,	the	millennium.	Step	back	from	your	house,	your
town,	 your	 country,	 your	 planet.	 Wherever	 you	 find	 something	 that	 you	 think
defines	or	contains	you	in	some	way,	you	can	step	back	from	it;	clinically	observe
your	belief,	your	attachment.	It’s	all	just	layers	of	dreamstuff.	You	can	stand	outside
all	these	things	and	observe	them	just	like	you	do	with	your	outward	character.”
	
“Can	you	give	an	example?”	she	asks.
	
“Sure,”	I	say.	“Do	you	ever	watch	the	news	on	TV?”
	
“Yes,	sometimes,	for	school	and	stuff.	I	like	it.”
	
“Well,	when	you	watch	the	news,	you	can	look	at	it	like	it’s	last	week’s	news,	or	last
year’s,	even	though	it’s	today’s	news.”
	
She	stares	at	me	and	chews	on	her	pen.
	
“Yeah,”	she	agrees,	“and	why?”
	
“To	detach,	to	focus	your	mind	and	vision	on	false	attachments,	to	stop	seeing
what’s	not.”
	
She	writes	that	down.	When	she	finishes	I	give	her	more	to	write.
	
“To	distance	yourself	from	local	and	national	and	world	events,	to	see	them	as
abstractions,	no	more	personal	to	you	than	if	they	occurred	in	a	different	time	or	a
different	land,	or	on	a	different	planet,	even	though	they	might	be	happening	right
outside	your	window.”
	
She	writes,	pauses,	writes	more,	stops	and	looks	up.
	

=== Page 92 ===
“To	help	you	see	your	false	idea	about	your	localized	nature,	to	pull	up	the	anchor
that	 holds	 you	 in	 this	 place	 and	 time.	 That	 anchor	 is	 just	 another	 emotional
attachment,	just	like	any	other.”
	
As	she	writes,	she	shakes	her	head	back	and	forth.	She	doesn’t	understand	this	stuff
now,	but	she’s	writing	it	down	so	she	doesn’t	have	to.	She	can	process	it	and	ask
follow-ups	at	another	session	if	she	wants.
	
She	finishes	writing	and	looks	to	see	if	I	have	more.
	
“To	pull	yourself	out	of	that	part	of	your	character	that	believes	today’s	news	is
more	significant	than	yesterday’s.	That’s	an	easy	belief	to	see	through.	The	news	is
like	a	snapshot	of	a	river.	It’s	instantly	obsolete.	Ultimately,	everything	you	think
you	know	is	really	just	something	you	believe.	This	is	how	you	can	dig	down
through	your	layers	of	belief;	peel	away	the	veils	of	delusion.	And	like	I	said,	it’s
really	nothing	more	than	observing;	seeing	what	is	by	learning	to	unsee	what’s	not.”
	
“I	know	that	I	am.	That’s	what	you	said,	right?	I	can’t	be	wrong	about	that,	can	I?”
	
“You	exist,	that’s	all	you	know.	Ultimately,	the	actor	has	no	qualities	at	all	except
being.	Not	God	or	Jesus	or	Buddha	can	say	more	than	that.”
	
“But	isn’t	this	all	just	make-believe?”
	
“That’s	the	point.	All	these	layers	that	contain	and	define	you	are	the	make-believe
part.	All	you	have	to	do	is	stop	making	the	belief.	We	don’t	do	that	by	making	new
beliefs	but	by	unmaking	old	ones,	by	seeing	these	attachments	and	beliefs	and	false
aspects	of	self	clearly.	Whenever	we	are	able	to	actually	do	that,	to	see	clearly,	we
break	the	attachment.	That’s	how	attachments	are	severed,	by	lighting	them	up,
focusing	the	mind	on	them.	They	can’t	survive	that.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Maggie	turns	to	her	mother,	who	is	lounging	by	the	pool.
	
“Is	this	what	you’re	doing,	mom?”
	
“I’m	not	sure,”	says	Lisa.	“I	think	there’s	a	pretty	big	difference	between	doing	it	as
an	exercise	and	doing	it	for	real.	Just	taking	one	little	step	is	so	difficult	that	it’s
seems	impossible	to	think	past	it.	And	I’m	not	talking	about	things	like	gender	or

=== Page 93 ===
nationality,	I	just	mean	thin	layers	of	self-image,	like	dependable	woman	and	good
wife.	And,	I	have	to	admit,	I’m	doing	it	selectively.	Trying	to,	anyway.”
	
“Maybe	it	would	have	been	different	for	you	if	you	had	learned	to	do	witnessing
when	you	were	young,”	suggests	Maggie.
	
“If	 someone	 had	 spoken	 to	 me	 like	 Mr.	 McKenna	 is	 speaking	 to	 you	 now,
explaining	the	difference	between	character	and	actor,	I	might	not	have	ever	gotten
so	firmly	set	in	my	ways.	I	think	I	would	have	developed	very	differently	and
wouldn’t	be	in	this	period	of	major	correction	right	now.”
	
“Do	you	think	this	is	something	I	should	do	personally?”
	
Lisa	sighs.	“I	can’t	see	anything	wrong	with	being	more	aware,	honey.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“And	where	are	you	in	all	this?”	Maggie	asks	me.
	
“Good	question.	You	know	all	these	layers	we’ve	discussed,	from	the	character
sitting	here	talking	to	you	all	the	way	back	through	duality	and	time	and	space?”
	
“Yes.”
	
“To	be	awake	means	you’re	not	fooled	by	any	of	that.	No	layers.	Awake	from	the
dream.”
	
“Not	even	destiny?”
	
“Not	even	destiny.”
	
“But	how	do	you	know	it	wasn’t	your	destiny	to	become	enlightened?”
	
“Another	good	question.	I	don’t.	I	have	no	knowledge	on	the	subject.	I	emerged
from	the	dreamstate	into	the	awakened	state,	so	who	knows	what	factors	played	a
role?	And,	frankly,	who	cares?	A	leaf	rushes	on	a	stream	and	comes	to	rest	on	a
rock.	So?	It	doesn’t	make	explanations.	What	does	it	care	how	it	got	there	or	where
its	going	next?”
	

=== Page 94 ===
“But	you	can’t	go	from	the	dreamstate	into	the	awakened	state	and	still	have	your
ego?”
	
“It	would	be	easier	for	a	camel	to	pass	through	the	eye	of	a	needle	than	for	the	false-
self	to	pass	into	the	awakened	state.”
	
“But	what	does	that	leave?”
	
“The	logical	impossibility	of	a	selfless	self;	an	egoless	entity.	As	you	see,	I	am	still
here	in	the	physical	world,	subject	to	physical	laws,	but	that’s	just	this	body	and	this
character.	The	actor	is	having	none	of	it.	It	would	even	be	more	accurate	to	say	the
actor	is	dead.”
	
“Dead?”
	
“If	a	person	is	dead	but	their	body	is	still	walking	around,	they’re	a	zombie.	If	a
person	is	dead	but	their	body	and	personality	are	still	walking	around,	they’re
enlightened.	I	know	that	doesn’t	seem	to	make	any	sense,	but	that	doesn’t	give	me
any	latitude	in	how	I	represent	it.	It	makes	perfect	sense	to	me,	and	to	anyone	else
in	the	awakened	state.”
	
She’s	shaking	her	head	as	she	takes	her	notes.
	
“What?”	I	ask.
	
“I	don’t	think	I	can	tell	my	class	that.”
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
