# The New World

The	New	World
	
All	deep,	earnest	thinking	is	but	the	intrepid	effort	of	the	soul	to	keep	the	open
independence	of	her	sea,	while	the	wildest	winds	of	heaven	and	earth	conspire	to
cast	her	on	the	treacherous,	slavish	shore.
	
Herman	Melville
	
	

=== Page 95 ===
It	would	be	two	weeks
	after	the	motorcycle	accident	before	Maya	and	I	were	able
to	resume	our	nightly	visits	to	Frank’s	poolside	for	a	drink	and	a	cigar.	I	was	able	to
take	her	for	short	walks	within	a	few	days	of	spilling	the	bike—a	cane	in	my	left
hand	and	a	long	plastic	tennis	ball	picker-upper-and-chucker	gizmo	in	my	right—
but	I	was	advised	against	too	much	too	soon.
	
I	used	the	opportunity	to	take	advantage	of	the	estate’s	home	theater	and	enormous
collection	of	movies.	The	owner	of	the	house,	because	of	who	he	was	in	the	music
world,	seemed	to	get	comp’d	a	copy	of	everything	put	out	by	the	major	distributors;
both	movies	and	music.	I	thought	it	would	be	no	problem	to	settle	in	to	such	a
beautifully	appointed	and	technologically	sophisticated	room	for	a	week	or	two	and
just	watch	movies	and	musical	performances,	but	it	got	old	in	the	first	hour.
	
Reading	books,	watching	movies	and	TV,	listening	to	music;	these	might	seem	like
passive	activities,	but	they’re	not.	We	have	to	bring	something	to	them.	It’s	not	all
take	and	no	give.	We	need	to	make	a	connection;	a	participatory	bargain	must	be
struck	and	kept.	If	we	don’t	supply	the	emotions,	they’re	not	there.	If	we	don’t
bridge	the	gap,	no	connection	gets	made.	This	is	true	of	everything	external	to	us
with	which	we	form	connections,	of	course,	but	for	me,	most	everything	else	had
already	fallen	away.	I	was	kind	of	hoping	escapist	movies	and	music	and	pointless
books	would	continue	to	amuse	me	for	a	few	more	years,	but—
	
“You’re	not	saying	all	movies	and	books	are	pointless,	are	you?”	asks	Lisa,	reading
over	my	shoulder.	“Hey,”	she	says,	“stop	that!	Stop	typing	what	I’m	saying—	Hey!”
	
She	laughs	and	busies	herself	with	papers	and	filling	glasses	and	tidying	up	before
taking	her	usual	seat	at	the	end	of	the	table.
	
I’m	a	task-specific	person.	Everything	I	do	is	either	about	the	books,	like	reading,
writing,	and	walking,	or	it’s	down-time,	like	eating	and	sleeping.	I’ve	discussed	this
with	Lisa	and	she	agrees	that	it’s	unusual	but	not	unheard	of.	I	asked	her	if	she
knew	anyone	like	that	and	she	said	no,	everyone	she’s	known	has	always	been	off	in
a	 hundred	 different	 directions,	 but	 that	 she	 imagined	 there	 must	 be	 intensely
focused	people	in	any	given	field;	in	the	arts,	in	science	and	exploration,	in	sports,
in	business.	Especially	spirituality,	she	muses,	citing	several	varieties	of	renunciate
and	vow-taker	to	make	her	point.
	
I	agreed	with	her,	except	I’m	not	passionate	or	even	very	focused.	I	tend	more
toward	the	lackadaisical	end	of	the	task-specific	spectrum.	The	movies	I	like	aren’t
the	movies	I	like,	they’re	the	movies	that	serve	the	books.	
Vanilla	Sky
	and	
Abre	Los

=== Page 96 ===
Ojos
,	
The	Matrix
	and	
The	Thirteenth	Floor
,	
Pleasantville
,	
Joe	vs	the	Volcano
,	
The
Graduate
	and	
About	Schmidt
;	these	are	some	of	my	favorite	movies,	but	I	wouldn’t
actually	care	to	watch	any	of	them.	They’re	favorites	because	I	appreciate	them	on
the	level	of	parable.	They’re	useful	for	communicating	because	everyone	is	familiar
with	them,	or	easily	could	be.	What	are	my	personal	movie	favorites?	That’s	the
point,	I	guess.	I	don’t	have	any.	There	is	no	person	to	have	personal	preferences,
there’s	only	the	task-specific	person	to	have	task-specific	preferences.
	
Books?	Same	thing.	
Moby-Dick
,	
Leaves	of	Grass
,	
1984
,	
Walden
	and	few	others
might	be	reckoned	my	favorites,	but	I	don’t	own	physical	copies	of	them	and
wouldn’t	pick	them	off	the	shelf	if	I	did.	I’ve	made	a	small	effort	recently	to	reread
some	 Kerouac,	 Bukowski,	 Dostoevsky,	 Solzhenitsyn,	 Hamsun,	 and	 Camus,	 but
instead	of	reading	for	pleasure,	it	feels	more	like	I’m	searching	for	something	for
my	own	books—the	next	
Moby-Dick
	or	
1984
	maybe—though	I	don’t	expect	to	find
it.
	
What’s	the	point?	Why	am	I	telling	you	this?	It’s	something	I’ve	been	saying	since
the	first	book	and	it’s	something	that	anyone	interested	in	these	books	would	want
to	understand	about	the	awakened	state.	This	receding	out	of	being	isn’t	poetic	or
spiritual	or	blissful.	Nor	is	it	not.	Jed	McKenna,	the	character,	has	been	zeroing	out
for	more	than	twenty	years	and	is	now	nearly	nullified.	It’s	like	being	a	hundred
years	old.	It’s	not	my	world	anymore,	even	though	I’m	still	in	it.	It’s	not	my	life
anymore,	even	though	I’m	still	living	it.	And,	as	with	a	hundred	year-old	man,
there’s	nothing	on	the	horizon.	There’s	nothing	to	hope	for,	nothing	to	look	forward
to,	and	nothing	can	happen	to	improve	the	situation.	If	I	won	the	lottery,	cured
cancer	and	married	a	supermodel,	things	wouldn’t	be	looking	any	better.	Happily,	I
don’t	find	my	situation	disagreeable.	I	don’t	wish	it	to	be	other	than	it	is.	It’s	natural
and	comfortable	and	fine.
	
Maybe	there	are	other	folks	writing	other	books	that	talk	about	this	part	of	things,
about	the	living	reality	of	the	truth-realized	state,	of	what	it’s	like	for	the	first	two
years,	the	first	ten	years,	what	it’s	like	after	twenty	years.	Maybe	there	are	such
books;	I	haven’t	looked	in	a	long	time.	I	know	of	some,	but	they’re	junked	up	with
so	much	God-Love-Beauty-Peace	crap	that	you	have	to	scrape	it	off	with	a	stick.
This	is	a	featureless,	unadorned,	undivided	state	and	should	be	related	as	such.
There’s	nothing	to	be	said	in	favor	of	it	except	that	it’s	not	a	lie.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	

=== Page 97 ===
One	thing	that	has	surprised	me	recently	was	a	kind	of	friendship	I	struck	up	with
Lisa’s	 dad,	 Frank.	 He’s	 a	 big,	 gruff,	 no-nonsense	 kind	 of	 guy,	 at	 least	 on	 the
exterior.	Inside	he’s	like	a	modern	Richard	Maurice	Bucke;	a	spiritual	romantic	with
a	 vision	 of	 humanity’s	 future	 that’s	 both	 tantalizingly	 possible	 and	 laughably
improbable.	He	introduced	himself	to	me	via	e-mail.	He	began	with	his	academic
credentials,	which	were	impressive.	He	then	spent	a	few	paragraphs	saying	nice
things	about	me	and	Damnedest	and	Incorrect	and	explaining	that	he	was	retired
now,	a	recent	widower,	and	going	a	little	batty	and	hoped	that	he’d	found	in	me
someone	with	whom	he	could	discuss	ideas	he’d	been	formulating	since	the	early
sixties	but	to	which	he	could	not	give	full	expression	during	his	academic	career.
	
That	was	almost	the	end	of	it	right	there.	I	don’t	correspond	much.	People	who	take
this	stuff	seriously	have	no	need	of	me	or	anyone	else,	only	of	finding	the	next
question,	of	taking	the	next	step,	of	finding	the	next	enemy	and	fighting	the	next
battle.	People	who	don’t	take	this	stuff	seriously	are	invariably	looking	for	ways	to
occupy	and	distract	themselves	so	they	don’t	have	to	take	any	real	steps	or	fight	any
real	battles.	No	one	needs	my	help	with	that,	and	they	won’t	have	any	trouble
finding	 plenty	 of	 help	 elsewhere.	 Modern	 spirituality	 in	 all	 its	 forms	 exists	 to
facilitate	spiritual	inertia:	the	tendency	of	a	seeker	at	rest	to	stay	at	rest.	I	made	a
deal	with	the	universe	at	the	earliest	stages	of	this	project	that	I	wouldn’t	let	myself
get	dragged	into	all	that	personal	drama	and	spiritual	escapism,	and	we’ve	always
understood	each	other	very	clearly	on	that	point.
	
But	once	in	a	while	something	finds	a	way	through	to	me,	as	with	Frank.	I	was
browsing	through	my	electronic	archives,	and	there	was	his	name	in	the	From
column	again	and	again.	His	name	stuck	in	my	head	and	I	eventually	began	reading
his	e-mails	to	see	why	this	man	had	written	to	me	thirty-one	times.
	
Once	I	started	reading	Frank’s	e-mails,	the	first	of	them	dating	back	more	than	a
year,	several	features	became	apparent	and	confirmed	for	me	that	he	was	meant	to
play	a	role	in	the	third	book	and	that	I	should	accept	his	standing	invitation	to	visit
his	home	in	Mexico	and	make	use	of	his	library.	One	was	his	mention	of	the	crisis
his	 daughter	 was	 in,	 which	 had	 some	 connection	 to	 Damnedest	 and	 Incorrect.
Another	was	his	references	to	Orwell’s	1984	which	I	had	just	read	three	or	four
times	in	the	previous	month	with	almost	as	much	pleasure	as	I	had	read	Moby-Dick
a	few	years	earlier.	1984	may	be	the	searing	indictment	of	political	oppression	or
the	 cautionary	 tale	 about	 personal	 privacy	 most	 people	 take	 it	 for—
yeahsurefinewhatever—but	like	Moby-Dick,	the	book	functions	elegantly	at	the
much	more	interesting	level	of	freedom	versus	bondage,	of	truth	versus	delusion,	of
man	versus	Maya.

=== Page 98 ===
	
We	pick	up	here	at	the	point	where	Frank	gets	to	the	point.
	
We	humans,	Mr.	McKenna,	are	of	two	minds	–	Finite	Mind	and	Infinite	Mind.	We
are,	more	accurately,	infinite	beings	with	the	capacity	to	live	and	function	in	a	finite
mode.
	
Man’s	situation,	in	broad	overview,	is	that	we	have	entirely	abandoned	Infinite
Mind	and	taken	up	exclusive	residence	in	Finite	Mind,	something	akin	to	moving
out	of	Versailles	and	into	cardboard	box,	though	the	actual	extremes	are	much
further	apart,	more	like	abandoning	heaven	in	favor	of	hell.	In	fact,	exactly	like
that.	We	are	self-exiles,	cast	out	of	the	garden.	We	are	the	fallen	angels.	Man	is	his
own	Lucifer	and	the	world	is	his	hell.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
I’m	going	to	digress	for	a	few	paragraphs	now.
	
Biblical	references	trigger	in	me	a	nearly	automatic	reaction	to	reject	what	I’m
reading	and	move	on;	a	mental	gag	reflex	of	sorts.	Actually,	citing	anyone	or
anything	as	authority	strikes	me	as	an	automatic	disqualifier.	I	like	to	use	quotations
and	excerpts	in	support	of	points	I’m	making,	but	never	to	be	believed	or	relied
upon	or	trusted	as	sources	of	authority.	The	only	authority	is	one’s	own	judgment
and	one’s	own	powers	of	reason	and	comprehension.	To	defer	to	authority	is	to	try
to	skip	a	step,	and	no	such	thing	is	possible.	There	is	nothing	we	need	to	understand
that	we	can’t	understand	for	ourselves.	We	need	not	abdicate	our	self-sovereignty	to
any	other	individual	or	book	or	institution.	Nothing	we	need	is	withheld	or	beyond
us,	and	no	one	has	ever	skipped	a	single	step.
	
The	 dogma	 and	 ideology	 of	 our	 upbringing	 are	 particularly	 pernicious	 in	 this
regard.	They	color	and	shape	our	thoughts	to	a	much	greater	degree	than	we	can
possibly	be	aware.	Spiritual	aspirants	of	any	background	may	feel	confident	that
they	have	rejected	and	moved	past	the	indoctrination	of	their	youth,	but	this	is	far
more	easily	said	than	done.
	
Anyone	can	rearrange	the	surface	of	their	persona	however	and	whenever	they	wish
—change	 clothes	 and	 hair,	 change	 name	 and	 address,	 change	 nationality	 and
religion—but	change	that	occurs	on	the	surface	is	merely	cosmetic.	It’s	like	painting
a	house	a	different	color	and	calling	it	a	different	house.	It’s	not.	It’s	the	same
house,	the	same	structure,	the	same	foundation,	just	a	different	color.	We	can	add

=== Page 99 ===
ornamentation,	drape	it	in	fabric,	redo	the	landscaping,	but	it	makes	no	substantive
difference.	If	we	want	it	to	be	a	different	house,	we	have	to	tear	it	down,	demolish
the	foundation,	cart	off	the	debris,	and	start	anew.
	
The	question	is	often	asked:	Can	a	person	really	change?	The	answer	is	yes,	and	this
is	how;	demolish	and	rebuild.	Die	and	be	reborn.	This	is	the	only	way.	We	can	sit	in
therapy	or	meditation	for	decades	and	be	the	same	person	we	were	when	we	started.
We	can	read	every	self-help	book,	subscribe	to	every	magazine,	join	every	group,
take	every	course,	make	every	effort,	but	if	it’s	still	the	same	structure	and	the	same
foundation,	then	it	doesn’t	matter	how	we	change	our	outward	appearance	and
behavior,	we’re	still	the	same	person.
	
Real	change	happens	far	below	the	surface,	at	normally	unplumbed	and	unsuspected
depths,	and	not	until	we	have	traveled	inward	and	downward	to	those	depths	of	self
can	we	make	any	claim	at	self-understanding	or	self-mastery.	Until	we	make	that
journey,	 we	 are	 completely	 subject	 to	 unseen	 forces,	 like	 bobbing	 corks	 on	 a
surging	 sea,	 but	 we	 don’t	 make	 that	 journey	 because	 it’s	 easier	 to	 convince
ourselves	that	it’s	our	bobbing	motion	that	causes	the	sea	to	surge.
	
Vanity.
	
End	of	digression.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
In	Frank’s	case,	I’m	glad	I	rode	out	the	biblical	references	because,	through	the
course	of	thirty-one	e-mails,	he	would	paint	a	very	intriguing	picture	of	an	alternate
reality	 for	 all	 mankind	 that	 he	 called,	 only	 half	 in	 jest,	 the	 New	 World	 and
sometimes,	New	America.	And	although	he	knew	it	would	never	come	to	pass	and
was	not	optimistic	about	man’s	future,	he	was	also	kind	enough	to	provide	not	only
a	map	to	New	America,	but	the	vehicle	by	which	everyone	could	get	there,	albeit	an
infamous	and	much	maligned	vehicle.
	
Somehow,	everything	has	become	flipped	upside	down.	Not	knowing	of	anything
better,	we	have	elevated	the	banalities	of	physical	survival	to	the	summit	of	human
experience	–	eating,	drinking,	sensual	pleasures,	sex	and	mating,	gathering	–	what
pathetic	consolations	they	are!	Wealth,	power,	prestige	–	such	words	would	not	even
appear	in	the	vocabulary	of	a	society	of	Whole	Beings,	but	for	us	Halflings,	they’re
all	we	have.
	

=== Page 100 ===
Too	much?	Do	I	exaggerate?	I	challenge	you	to	read	on,	Mr.	McKenna,	and	see	if
you	don’t	find	yourself	in	full	agreement	with	me.
	
There	were	two	things	in	Frank’s	first	e-mails	that	caught	my	attention.	The	first
was	his	assertion	that	everyone	is	wrong	about	everything	all	the	time.	This	is	a
message	that	strikes	a	chord	with	me.	It	sounds	really	bad,	but	it’s	actually	really
good.	It	means	there	aren’t	millions	of	things	wrong,	just	one,	right	at	the	source,
and	everything	else	that	appears	wrong	stems	from	that	single	core	error.	It	may	not
seem	like	it,	but	that’s	a	very	pro-human,	optimistic	point	of	view,	and	I’m	in	full
agreement.
	
Another	thing	Frank	would	say	in	his	first	few	e-mails	that	caught	me,	and	which
was	at	the	heart	of	his	overall	message,	was	that	we	can	all	be	Buddhas,	now.
	
Well,	real	soon,	anyway.	And	he	wasn’t	kidding.
	
That	works	for	me	too.	Spiritual	elitism	in	any	form	is	an	unmistakable	symptom	of
blind-leading-the-blind	syndrome.	All	we	are	is	consciousness.	To	suggest	that	one
being	 could	 be	 superior	 or	 inferior	 to	 another	 is	 to	 reveal	 complete	 ignorance
regarding	the	simplest	of	matters.	There	are	no	second-tier	people,	and	no	informed
spiritual	teaching	or	religion	would	ever	suggest	that	anyone	could	ultimately	be
superior	or	inferior	to	another.
	
But	that’s	not	what	Frank	meant.	He	wasn’t	saying	we’re	all	equal	in	consciousness.
He	was	saying	we	could	all	be	Buddhas.	Now.	That’s	a	helluva	thing	to	say.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Finite	Mind	is	really	nothing	more	than	the	intelligence	of	a	physical	life	support
system	that	allows	us	to	experience	and	explore	Infinite	Mind	from	the	outside
looking	in.	Experiencing	and	exploring	Infinite	Mind	is	our	meaning	and	purpose.
	
Finite	 Mind	 keeps	 the	 body	 alive	 and	 safe.	 It’s	 necessary	 for	 survival	 and
reproduction,	but	survival	and	reproduction	to	what	end?	Survival	and	reproduction
for	the	sake	of	more	survival	and	reproduction?	That	seems	absurd,	but	that	is
exactly	the	story	of	man	so	far.	All	we	are	doing	is	treading	water,	marching	in
place.
	
It	doesn’t	have	to	be	that	way	and	those	who	have	looked,	(there	are	many,	as	you
will	see),	have	seen	that	it’s	not	meant	to	be.	We	are	living	empty	lives,	yes	sir,	but

=== Page 101 ===
we	are	doing	so	in	error,	and	it’s	an	error	that	can	be	corrected.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“He’s	 a	 bit	 of	 a	 crackpot,	 I’m	 afraid,”	 says	 Lisa	 after	 reading	 the	 first	 few
paragraphs.
	
“Yes,”	I	agree,	“he’s	referred	to	himself	at	various	times	as,”	I	refer	to	my	notes,	“a
cheerful	 crackpot,	 a	 toothless	 insurgent,	 an	 armchair	 revolutionary,	 a	 passive
radical,	and	a	pragmatic	utopian.”
	
Lisa	picks	up	the	next	page	and	continues	reading	her	father’s	words.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Finite	Mind	is	an	integral	part	of	the	equation	of	Finite	and	Infinite	–	the	Yin	and
Yang	of	the	sentient	being	–	but	that’s	not	what	we	have.	We	are	all	Yin	and	no	Yang.
We	are	flat,	lifeless	facsimiles	of	the	beings	we	are	meant	to	be.	It’s	not	a	mere	piece
that	we’re	missing,	it’s	an	entire	dimension,	the	critical	dimension,	that	we	lack.
When	half	is	missing,	the	other	half	becomes	the	new	whole,	which	is	a	different
being	entirely	–	a	Halfling.
	
We	do	everything	in	our	power	to	deny	the	reality	of	our	situation.	We	strain	reason
and	credulity	to	deny	and	rationalize	our	condition	rather	than	acknowledging	it
and	correcting	it.
	
In	 the	 simplest	 terms,	 we	 are	 all	 meant	 to	 be	 Buddhas,	 and	 we	 all	 can	 be	 –
everyone.	And	this	corrupt,	misbegotten,	hellish	earth	can	become	a	paradise	–
now.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“Aw	geez,”	groans	Lisa.	“Is	my	dad	nuts?”
	
“If	he	is,	then	I	am	too.”
	
“Great,	the	two	most	important	men	in	my	life	at	this	critical	juncture	are	both
certifiable.	Are	you	going	to	put	this	material	in	the	book?”
	
“Do	you	know	what	he’s	getting	at?”

=== Page 102 ===
	
“I	have	no	idea.	He’s	been	into	a	lot	of	weird	stuff,	that	was	his	big	thing	as	a
teacher.	I’m	afraid	it	sounds	a	little	like	New	Age	mysticism	or	something.”
	
“Kind	 of.	 Mysticism	 for	 the	 masses.	 Every	 man,	 woman	 and	 child	 a	 Buddha.
Cosmic	consciousness.	A	new	society	emerging	from	the	ashes	of	this	one.	That’s
what	he’s	talking	about.”
	
“Oh	God.	Seriously,	are	you	guys	both	crazy?”
	
“It’s	just	hypothetical.”
	
“But	he’s	saying	it	could	happen.”
	
“Oh	yeah,	definitely.	It	won’t,	but	it	theoretically	could.	That’s	what	makes	it	fun.
Neither	of	us	are	thinking	about	this	as	something	that’s	really	going	to	happen,	like
activists	or	crusaders	or	something.	More	like	two	guys	hollering	big,	sprawling
ideas	across	a	pond	at	each	other.	It’s	like	trying	to	figure	out	what	the	world	would
be	like	today	if	the	revolution	hadn’t	been	defeated.”
	
“There	was	a	revolution?”	She	looks	up	at	me.	“What	revolution?”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
The	current	state	of	humans	on	earth	is,	compared	to	what	it	could	and	should	be,	a
state	of	being	far	more	terrible	than	any	writer	ever	has	or	ever	will	portray.	We
can	look	at	the	dystopian	visions	of	Huxley,	Zamyatin,	Orwell,	Burgess,	Rand,
Bradbury	and	others,	and	think	about	how	good	we	have	it	compared	to	how	bad	it
could	be,	but	when	we	adopt	a	view	that	encompasses	our	full	potential,	it	becomes
painfully	clear	that	no	dystopian	vision	has	ever	been	imagined	that	rivals	our	very
own	reality	for	inescapable	nightmarish	horror.	Emerson	was	right	when	he	said
man	is	a	god	in	ruins,	and	what	could	be	more	horrible	than	that?	We	are	our	own
worst	case	scenario.	It	is	only	our	ignorance	that	shields	us,	but	it	is	that	very
shield	of	ignorance	that	imprisons	us.	Sound	familiar,	Mr.	McKenna?
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
I	show	Lisa	the	folder	containing	hardcopies	of	the	e-mails	her	father	sent	me.
	
“Jesus,”	she	says,	“he’s	really	pulling	out	all	the	stops.”

=== Page 103 ===
	
“I	think	he’s	had	this	building	up	in	him	for	forty	years.	It	seems	like	all	his	various
interests	over	the	years	kind	of	drove	him	to	this	ultimate	conclusion.	It’s	really	too
over-the-top	for	any	sort	of	academic	usage,	of	course,	but	now	he’s	stumbled	onto
me	and	he	can	spill	out	his	whole	crazy	theory	to	someone	who’ll	appreciate	it.”
	
“And	publish	it.”
	
“That’s	always	been	the	plan.”
	
She	looks	up.
	
“Always?”
	
“Sure,	the	third	book	can’t	ignore	this	material.	From	my	perspective,	your	father	is
just	the	ride.	I	was	going	to	take	the	trip	anyway.”
	
“So	his	ideas	aren’t	new	to	you?”
	
“There’s	really	only	one	idea;	one	problem	and	one	solution.”
	
“And	the	problem	is?”
	
“That	we	assume	we’re	whole	beings	when	we’re	only—”
	
“Halflings,”	she	says.
	
“Half,	yes,	and	not	the	good	half.	Your	father	spent	years	tracing	all	the	faults	of
mankind	 back	 to	 their	 source	 and	 was	 finally	 forced	 to	 an	 unbelievable	 yet
undeniable	conclusion.	I	came	at	it	differently.	I	started	at	the	unbelievable	yet
undeniable	conclusion	and	worked	outward.	The	idea	that	everyone	is	wrong	about
everything	all	the	time	is	something	I’m	very	comfortable	with;	it’s	the	essential
nature	of	the	dreamstate.	Your	father	took	a	long	time	to	be	able	to	see	it,	but	for	me
it’s	just	a	matter	of	course.”
	
“This	all	sounds	so	depressing.”
	
“Does	it?	The	only	thing	I	know	of	that	should	depress	anyone	is	being	ego-clad,
and	that’s	a	good	thing	to	be	depressed	about	because	then	you	can	awaken	to	your
situation	and	remedy	it,	as	you	yourself	are	doing.	Everyone	should	be	depressed	as

=== Page 104 ===
hell,	and	if	they	were,	then	something	might	actually	happen.	The	reason	we’re	not
committing	suicide	by	the	millions	is	because	we	live	in	constant	state	of	protective
denial	that	wraps	us	like	an	invisible	membrane,	the	price	of	which	is	a	life	lived	at
the	bare	minimum	level	of	consciousness.	The	necessities	of	life	are	food,	water,
shelter,	clothing,	denial	and	distraction.	Once	we	have	those,	we	can	turn	to	the
business	of	raising	the	next	generation	of	walking	dead.”
	
“You’re	just	a	little	ray	of	sunshine,	aren’t	you?”
	
“Do	you	disagree?”
	
She	releases	a	sigh.
	
“I	guess	not,	it	just	sounds	so—	yuck!”
	
“We’ve	only	scratched	the	surface	of	what	a	human	being	really	is.	To	me,	and	to
Bucke,	and	to	your	father,	I	think,	this	isn’t	depressing	at	all.	The	human	race	isn’t
defective,	it’s	just	broken.	That’s	good	news.	It	means	we	can	fix	ourselves.	We
don’t	have	to	be	like	this.	A	solution	can	be	found.	Something	interesting	could
actually	happen.	Anyway,	that’s	the	basic	premise	of	these	ideas	your	dad	and	I	like
to	play	with.”
	
“What	is	this	potential	we	have?”
	
“Infinite	Mind,	Inner	Access.	Every	man,	woman	and	child	a	Buddha.	Free	and
easy	access	for	everyone.”	I	look	at	her	over	the	tops	of	my	glasses.	“You’re	really
not	in	the	loop	on	all	this?”
	
“I’m	really	not.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Man	 is	 not	 plagued	 by	 countless	 thousands	 of	 insurmountable	 problems,	 as	 it
certainly	appears,	but	by	one	core	problem	from	which	all	others	radiate.	The	world
appears	dark	and	murky	and	unknowable,	so	we	falsely	assume	it	is	dark	and	murky
and	unknowable,	and	we	live	our	lives	based	on	that	unfounded	assumption.	Not
knowing	any	better,	we	muddle	along	as	best	we	can,	fumbling	blindly,	trying	to
interpret	 the	 shadows	 and	 make	 sense	 of	 the	 darkness.	 We	 have	 some	 of	 our
smartest	people	on	the	case—scientists,	sages,	priests,	scholars,	poets,	artists—all
striving	to	help	us	to	make	sense	of	the	world,	but	they	haven’t	come	up	with	much,

=== Page 105 ===
and	it’s	pretty	clear	they’re	not	going	to.	We	do	what	we’ve	been	doing	forever	and
it	results	in	the	world	we	have	at	present;	a	world	which	is	in	no	meaningful	way	an
improvement	over	the	world	as	it	has	ever	been,	because	man	himself	is	in	no
meaningful	way	improved.
	
But	here’s	the	good	part.
	
Man’s	potential	is	not	dark	and	murky	and	unknowable;	it	is	consciousness	and	it	is
infinite.	We	can	reclaim	the	infinite	dimension	from	which	we	are	presently	severed
by	ego,	by	fear.	We	can	gain	re-entry	into	that	from	which	we	have	been	cast	out;
garden,	paradise,	heaven	on	earth.	Any	and	everyone	can	do	this,	or	so	the	theory
goes.	It’s	not	reserved	for	the	elite	or	the	intelligent	or	the	devout	any	more	than
sunlight	is	reserved	for	the	wealthy	or	worthy.	It	doesn’t	take	years	or	decades	or
lifetimes.	It	is	proven,	documented,	irrefutable,	consistently	reproducible	science.	It
is	easy,	cheap,	and	here	right	now.	And	what	it	means	is	that	no	one,	no	matter	their
circumstances,	no	matter	how	high	or	low,	how	sick	or	well,	how	rich	or	poor,	is
ever	more	than	an	hour	away	from	the	more	popular	but	non-abiding	version	of
Spiritual	Enlightenment:
	
God-Consciousness.
	
So	now	we	consider	a	different	approach	to	the	problem.	Instead	of	fumbling	about
in	the	darkness	and	desperately	maintaining	the	self-deception	that	we’re	so	darned
happy	and	have	such	a	good	handle	on	things,	we	can	take	the	opposite	approach.
We	can	breed	and	cultivate	a	critical	discontent.	We	can	be	aggressively	pessimistic.
We	can	look	hard	and	see	clearly.	We	can	open	ourselves	to	the	amply-evidenced
possibility	that	the	bright	end	of	our	visible	spectrum	is	really	only	a	dusky	twilight,
that	we	truly	are	ignorant	brutes,	that	our	fairy-tale	belief	systems	are	beneath
contempt,	and	that	all	our	efforts	at	self-elevation	result	only	in	self-deception.
Once	armed	with	these	few,	obvious	truths,	we	can	at	long	last	lower	our	defenses
and	say	yes	to	fear	and	go	into	it.	We	can	acknowledge	the	fact	that	we	are	just
treading	water,	delaying	the	inevitable,	busying	ourselves	with	this	and	that	petty
distraction	 until	 we	 slip	 down	 into	 the	 darkness	 we’ve	 dedicated	 our	 lives	 to
denying.
	
When	we	trace	all	problems	back	to	their	single	source,	we	find	that	the	world
appears	dark	and	murky	and	unknowable	not	because	it	is,	but	because	the	lens
through	which	it	is	projected/perceived	is	filthy.	The	lens	is	self	and	the	filth	is	ego.
Clean	 the	 lens	 and	 the	 world	 resolves	 into	 crystal	 clarity,	 and	 darkness	 and

=== Page 106 ===
murkiness	are	forgotten	as	if	they	never	were.	(Eliminate	the	lens	altogether	and
you’re	enlightened,	but	then,	who	is	left	to	be	enlightened?)
	
That’s	why	any	true	and	complete	spiritual	teaching	can	be	fully	expressed	in	a	few
words;	wipe	the	lens,	think	for	yourself,	open	your	eyes,	know	thyself,	ask	Who	am
I?	All	the	world’s	spiritual	systems	are	dedicated	to	making	the	most	of	the	least,
but	why	make	the	most	of	darkness	when	we	can	just	turn	on	the	lights?
	
Because	we	are	not	adequately	discontent.	We	don’t	know	where	the	switch	is
because	we	haven’t	looked	for	it,	and	we	haven’t	looked	for	it	because	we	don’t
know	we’re	living	in	the	dark.
	
Frank	knows	that	mankind	dwells	in	a	state	of	perpetual	darkness,	which	is	nice,	but
the	reason	we’re	talking	about	him	here	is	because	he	also	knows	where	the	light
switch	is.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
