# The Golden Door

The	Golden	Door
	
“Keep,	ancient	lands,	your	storied	pomp!”	cries	she
With	silent	lips.	“Give	me	your	tired,	your	poor,
Your	huddled	masses	yearning	to	breathe	free,
The	wretched	refuse	of	your	teeming	shore.
Send	these,	the	homeless,	tempest-tost	to	me,
I	lift	my	lamp	beside	the	golden	door!”
	
Emma	Lazarus,	The	New	Colossus
Inscribed	at	the	Statue	of	Liberty
	
	
Frank	was	heir
	to	the	vision	of	Dr.	Richard	M.	Bucke,	author	of	the	1901	book
Cosmic	Consciousness.	He	saw	what	Bucke	saw,	knew	what	Bucke	knew,	and,	like
Bucke,	he	had	the	intelligence,	imagination	and	courage	to	put	the	pieces	together
and	envision	a	future	in	which	we	were	all	granted	full	and	unrestricted	access	to
our	own	internal	dimensions.	On	the	one	hand	it	sounds	like	the	most	obvious,
desirable	and	natural	thing	in	the	world:	Freedom.	On	the	other	hand,	it	sounds
weirdly	insane	and	dangerously	radical:	Heresy.

=== Page 107 ===
	
Frank	told	me	that	he	had	always	planned	to	write	Cosmic	Consciousness	II,	but	he
had	the	opposite	problem	that	Bucke	had.	Where	it	was	probably	all	Bucke	could	do
to	cobble	together	a	handful	of	anecdotal	cases,	Frank	was	awash	in	a	sea	of	lucid
firsthand	accounts;	some	under	scientific	conditions,	some	not,	but	no	shortage	of
them	that	were	cogent	and	powerful	and	unassailable.	The	real	issue,	he	explained,
isn’t	the	one-time	event,	but	lasting	transformation;	the	permanent	upliftment	of	the
individual.	Those	cases,	he	said,	were	not	so	lavishly	scattered,	but	could	still	be
found.
	
He	didn’t	want	to	write	just	another	rehash	of	the	little	revolution	that	couldn’t.	He
wanted	to	carry	on	in	the	spirit	of	Bucke	and	approach	the	subject	with	an	almost
childlike	gladness,	with	a	Christmas	morning	excitement,	as	if	mankind’s	great
present	from	God	was	sitting	at	our	feet,	wrapped	in	shiny	paper	with	a	perfect	bow,
just	waiting	for	us	to	rip	it	open,	and	with	it,	ourselves.	That	was	his	dilemma;
childlike	gladness	was	ill-received	in	the	halls	of	academia.	Christmas	morning
excitement	doesn’t	pay	the	bills.	Frank	had	a	career	to	think	about	and	a	family	to
feed.
	
He	never	wrote	his	book,	so	he’ll	have	to	settle	for	a	few	inadequate	pages	in	mine.
I	can’t	make	his	argument	for	him,	but	the	great	frustration	of	his	life	was	that	he
couldn’t	either.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Frank	wasn’t	at	Harvard	or	Millbrook	with	Leary,	or	in	the	redwoods	or	on	the	bus
with	Kesey,	or	in	jail	with	either	of	them,	but	he	was	there	on	the	fringe	somewhere,
just	starting	out	in	his	academic	career,	full	of	big	ideas	and	a	little	revolutionary
zeal.	He	was	already	familiar	with	Bucke,	Whitman,	Thoreau,	Emerson,	and	that
bunch.	 He	 was	 already	 immersed	 in	 the	 mindset	 of	 an	 elevated	 humanity	 and
convinced	of	its	potential	for	upheaval.	He	understood	and	believed	in	what	Bucke
called	cosmic	consciousness,	but	the	problem,	as	he	saw	it,	was	one	of	access.	What
good	was	this	wonderful	faculty	everyone	supposedly	possessed	if	no	one	could
access	it?	What	good	is	a	door	if	you	can’t	open	it	and	go	through?
	
“It’s	not	about	the	door	or	the	wall	or	the	key,”	he	told	me	during	one	of	our
evening	chats,	“none	of	that.	Those	only	matter	on	this	side.	The	point	is	what’s	on
the	other	side.	The	point	is	going	there,	being	there.	Then	all	this	nonsense	of	doors
and	keys	is	forgotten.”
	

=== Page 108 ===
I	agreed	with	him	on	that	restating	of	the	gateless	gate	paradox.	The	person	who	is
free	has	no	feeling	of	freedom	any	more	than	a	person	who	is	not	on	fire	has	a
feeling	of	being	not	on	fire.	Freedom	is	a	concept	of	the	incarcerated	mentality.	It’s
something	you	think	about	when	you’re	looking	at	windowless	walls	and	locked
doors.	Once	you’re	through	and	beyond,	the	very	concepts	of	captivity	and	freedom
recede	out	of	existence	behind	you.
	
So	there	was	Frank	in	the	late	fifties	and	early	sixties,	staring	at	a	wall	he	knew	was
a	door,	but	a	door	he	didn’t	know	how	to	open.	Maybe	he’d	been	through	it	himself,
but	in	selfless	bodhisattva	style	he	wanted	to	throw	it	open	for	everyone.	“Why
shouldn’t	it	be	open?”	he	once	asked	me.	“What	the	hell’s	the	point	of	anything	else
if	we	don’t	have	this?”
	
Good	question.
	
And	then,	what	to	his	wondering	eyes	should	appear?	The	Golden	Key.	Very	much
a	miracle	and,	to	Frank’s	way	of	thinking,	far	more	important	than	the	discovery	of
fire	or	the	invention	of	the	wheel.	As	with	his	famous	Harvard	counterparts,	the	first
keys	he	found	out	about	were	brass	and	tin,	but	they	would	soon	be	displaced	by	the
true	Golden	Key:	Lysergic	acid	diethylamide.	LSD.
	
Instant	Buddhahood.	Free	and	easy	access	for	everyone.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
The	New	World.	That’s	what	Frank	called	this	dream	of	his.	He	thought	America
would	be	at	the	center	of	it,	that	this	was	the	true	freedom,	and	that	ushering	in	a
new	era	of	fully	realized	human	potential	was	America’s	promise	and	responsibility.
That,	to	him,	was	the	American	dream,	the	Emersonian	ideal;	not	a	car	in	every
garage	and	a	chicken	in	every	pot.	Frank’s	New	World	was	about	a	new	tomorrow,
not	 a	 continued	 downward	 spiral	 of	 greed,	 corruption,	 disease	 and	 stultifying
mediocrity.
	
In	the	same	way	that	having	a	clear	vision	of	humanity’s	potential	soured	him	on
the	 current	 state	 of	 humanity,	 having	 a	 clear	 vision	 of	 America’s	 potential
disappointed	him	with	regard	to	its	current	state.	I	think	this	might	be	one	of	the
reasons	he	and	Isabel	bought	their	Mexico	house	years	ago	and	vacationed	here	and
ultimately	 retired	 here.	 Frank	 was	 quietly	 disgusted	 with	 the	 United	 States	 of
America.
	

=== Page 109 ===
He	had	a	sad	sort	of	disillusioned	air	about	him.	From	our	semi-boozy	discussions	I
was	able	to	form	a	fairly	clear	picture	of	why.	Simply,	he	was	a	patriot.	He	loved
America,	 but	 the	 idea	 of	 America	 meant	 something	 to	 him	 that	 the	 reality	 of
America	didn’t	approach.	It	wasn’t	the	place	or	the	people	he	had	such	feelings	for,
but	the	idea.	He	wasn’t	a	nationalist,	he	was	a	humanist	and	an	idealist.	He	felt	that
America	had	a	destiny	it	had	failed	to	fulfill.	He	thought	we	were	supposed	to	be
venturing	into	new	frontiers,	not	walling	them	off	and	plastering	them	over.	He
once	likened	his	feelings	for	the	U.S.	to	a	son	for	whom	one	has	the	highest	hopes
and	expectations,	only	to	watch	him	grow	into	a	common	street	thug	and	drug
addict,	beyond	redemption,	all	potential	wasted,	all	hope	gone.	He	sadly	echoed
Lincoln’s	battlefield	dream	that	this	nation	shall	have	a	new	birth	of	freedom.	“But
what	started	out	of	the	people,	by	the	people	and	for	the	people,”	he	said,	“is	now	of
the	corporation,	by	the	corporation	and	for	the	corporation.”
	
When	I	knew	him,	he	still	possessed	a	youthful	dreaminess	that	most	of	us	leave
behind	with	our	teens;	an	obstinate	sort	of	optimism	he	had	never	outgrown.	It’s	a
good	thing	he	liked	to	drink	or	I	might	never	have	seen	it	in	him.	He	didn’t	get	loud
or	wobbly	or	maudlin	when	he	drank,	just	nostalgic	for	the	idealism	of	his	youth.
	
And	even	with	all	that,	he	was	not	particularly	sentimental.	He	didn’t	pine	for	his
stillborn	revolution,	he	merely	expressed	a	sadness	for	what	he	once	glimpsed
through	a	slightly	open	door;	his	dream	of	emancipation,	of	a	liberated	humanity.
Every	man,	woman	and	child	whole	and	complete.	He	approached	it	like	it	was	an
academic	issue	for	him,	but	there	was	a	lot	of	feeling	behind	his	words.	Words	like
his	don’t	get	expressed	without	a	lot	of	feeling	behind	them.	In	Bucke’s	case,	as	in
Frank’s,	the	words	were	fueled	by	the	direct	experience	of	a	reality	behind	this	one,
and	the	certain	knowledge	that	this	one	was	flat	and	hollow	by	comparison.	The
direct	experience	of	cosmic	consciousness	is	something	that	can	generate	a	lot	of
feeling.
	
The	rest	is	history.	The	dream	is	dead,	murdered	in	its	cradle.
	
“But	for	a	little	while	it	was	there,”	Frank	told	me	on	one	of	those	boozy	nights.
“We	could	open	that	door	for	everyone	forever,	or	so	it	seemed.	I	still	don’t	know
what	happened.	It	all	got	away	from	us	so	fast.	Well,	you	know	the	story,	you’ve
read	the	books.	Here	it	is	forty	years	later	and	look	at	this	ridiculous	world	we	have.
What	would	it	look	like	instead	if	that	door	had	been	kept	open?	What	would	we	be
like	after	several	generations?	What	would	that	look	like?	It	wouldn’t	look	like
Woodstock	or	Haight-Ashbury.	That	was	nothing.	That	was	just	the	first	few	crazy

=== Page 110 ===
minutes	of	a	history	that	was	never	written.	The	door	has	turned	back	into	a	wall
now.	Maybe	it’s	just	as	well.	Maybe	it’s	better	that	people	don’t	know.”
	
What	a	great	cause	to	be	on	the	losing	side	of.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“It	doesn’t	sound	like	my	father,”	Lisa	said	as	we	walked	the	shoreline.	“I	knew	he
liked	that	book,	Cosmic	Consciousness,	but	I	didn’t	know	he	had	all	these	crazy
ideas	about	evolution	or	anything.”
	
“It	seems	like	something	a	man	in	his	position	might	want	to	keep	private,”	I	say.
	
“From	his	own	family?”
	
I	don’t	respond.	She	knows	I’m	not	the	one	to	ask	personal	questions,	so	when	I
don’t	answer,	she	doesn’t	push.
	
“Do	you	agree	with	him?”	she	asks.
	
“About	what?”
	
“About	the	whole	thing.”
	
“I	don’t	see	anything	to	disagree	with.	I	mean,	it	has	the	air	of	a	nutty	conspiracy
theory,	but	I	don’t	see	any	specific	error	in	your	father’s	thinking.	LSD	is	certainly
everything	he	said	it	was;	the	facts	are	in	on	that	once	you	look	past	the	rabid
vilification	by	Maya’s	Ministry	of	Propaganda	and	Disinformation.	Anyone	capable
of	looking	can	see	that	for	themselves.	Mankind	is	certainly	functioning	at	a	very
marginal	level	of	consciousness,	so	the	only	direction	is	up.	Clearly,	there’s	an	on-
the-bus	or	off-the-bus	element—”
	
“So	you	did	agree	with	him.”
	
“As	an	exercise	in	dreamstate	theory	it	was	fun	and	it	benefited	the	book.	Beyond
that—”	I	leave	it	hanging.
	
“Beyond	that,	what?”
	

=== Page 111 ===
“Beyond	that,	nothing.	Except	as	it	serves	the	book,	I	have	very	little	interest	in	the
matter.	Your	father	understood	that.”
	
“Oh,	I	forget,”	she	says	sarcastically,	“it’s	all	just	a	dream.	Nothing	is	personal	to
you.	Nothing	really	matters.”
	
We	walk	in	silence	for	a	few	minutes.
	
“I’m	sorry	to	be	getting	testy,”	she	says.
	
“Say	what	you	want.	This	is	the	time.”
	
“Okay	then,	so	isn’t	that	right?	Nothing	matters	to	you.	Nothing	is	important	to	you.
Nothing	is	good	or	bad	or	better	or	worse?”
	
I	know	this	is	all	very	personal	for	her,	but	she’s	right;	nothing	is	personal	to	me.	If
I	had	to	choose	between	an	age	of	enlightenment	and	an	ice	age,	I’d	have	to	flip	a
coin.	It	would	be	like	going	to	a	theater	and	choosing	between	two	movies;	the
elevation	of	mankind	to	the	left	and	the	extermination	of	mankind	to	the	right.	Both
have	their	charms	and	both	would	make	for	an	amusing	diversion,	whether	in	reel
life	or	real	life,	but	if	confronted	with	such	a	choice,	I’d	probably	decide	not	to	see	a
movie	and	go	for	a	walk	instead.
	
We	stroll	in	silence	for	a	few	minutes	before	she	speaks.
	
“So,	it	was	a	failed	revolution,	the	way	my	father	saw	it?”
	
“In	effect.	He	joked	once	that	if	you	want	to	topple	a	superpower,	you	shouldn’t
send	peaceniks	and	flower	children	to	do	it.	He	wanted	the	door	opened,	that	was
the	 objective;	 free	 and	 easy	 access	 for	 everyone.	 It	 follows	 that	 the	 existing
paradigm	would	be	overturned,	but	that	wasn’t	his	main	focus.”
	
“I	keep	hearing	this	thing	about	free	and	easy	access,”	she	says.
	
“For	everyone,”	I	add.	“Free	and	easy	inner	access	for	everyone.	That’s	how	your
dad	phrased	it.”
	
“Okay,	 what’s	 that	 about,	 I	 mean,	 why	 phrase	 it	 that	 way?	 It	 seems	 like	 very
deliberate	wording,	almost	legalese.”
	

=== Page 112 ===
“Your	father	came	up	with	the	phrase	with	several	things	in	mind.	It’s	very	tricky	to
take	a	pro-drug	position	in	this	day	and	age,	especially	if	the	drug	is	as	effectively
demonized	as	acid,	though,	technically,	I	believe	it’s	an	agent,	not	a	drug.	Your
father	sought	to	head	off	the	inevitable	kneejerk	reactions	wherever	possible.”
	
“Acid,”	she	winces,	“Christ,	I	can’t	believe	we’re	even	talking	about	this.”
	
“That’s	the	kind	of	reaction	he	meant.	He	wasn’t	aware	of	any	problem	with	LSD.
He	thought	it	was	all	good.”
	
“Is	it?”
	
“I	haven’t	found	any	problem,	but,	as	I	told	your	dad,	I	wouldn’t	care	if	I	did.”
	
“Meaning	what?”
	
“Meaning—”	I	pause,	wanting	to	answer	deliberately	and	correctly,	here	on	the	hard
edge	of	things,	“that	if	I	were	the	guy	in	charge	of	making	this	dream	come	true,	I’d
accept	a	very	high	casualty	level.	Just	as	if	I	were	doing	it	for	my	own	liberation,
I’d	be	very	risk-tolerant.	Very.	It’s	all	just	hypothetical	though;	the	actual	downside
appears	to	be	negligible.”
	
“But	he	was	speaking	in	private	with	you.	Why	such	cautious	language?	It’s	not	like
him	to	be	so	guarded,	and	you	seem	sympathetic	to	his	views.”
	
“I	think	he’d	been	writing	a	book	in	his	head	for	decades.	You	might	even	find
notes	or	drafts	among	his	things.	His	ideas	were	pretty	well	developed.	He	used	that
particular	 phrasing	 to	 define	 a	 standard.	 He	 wasn’t	 talking	 about	 a	 hippie
renaissance	 or	 renewed	 government	 testing	 or	 more	 university	 studies,	 he	 was
talking	about	unrestricted	access	to	normally	unavailable	dimensions	of	selfhood,
and	the	criteria	he	settled	on	as	a	clear	standard	was	free	and	easy	access	for
everyone.	LSD	happens	to	meet	that	standard	and	nothing	else	does.”
	
“Really?	Nothing	else?”
	
“Your	dad’s	phrase	is	clever	in	that	it’s	very	exclusionary.	It	excludes	a	lot	of	other
drugs	 and	 agents	 and	 analogues.	 It	 also	 excludes	 other	 methods	 for	 achieving
expanded	states.	For	instance,	there	are	Zen	masters	and	meditation	experts	and
spiritual	gurus	who	claim	that	LSD	is	artificial	and	that	their	proprietary	methods
are	the	only	true	and	real	and	lasting	forms	of	inner	access,	something	like	that.”

=== Page 113 ===
	
“Is	that	a	valid	observation?	I	mean,	would	you	know?”
	
“I	wouldn’t	presume	to	speak	for	their	experiences,	but	I	would	say	that	they	had
their	chance	and	never	managed	anything	close	to	your	father’s	stated	ideal.	In	my
opinion,	free	and	easy	access	for	everyone	renders	all	religions	and	philosophies
and	spiritual	teachings	instantly	obsolete	and	irrelevant,	and	good	riddance.	It	puts
them	out	of	a	game	they	were	never	really	in.”
	
“And	LSD	really	does	that?”
	
“I	wasn’t	able	to	disprove	it.”
	
“And	religious	and	spiritual	groups	find	that	threatening?”
	
“Some,	naturally.	If	chemical	mysticism	means	you	can	drag	any	bum	in	off	the
street	 after	 breakfast	 and	 have	 him	 experiencing	 a	 full-blown	 state	 of	 God
consciousness	before	lunch,	then	the	rules	have	changed.	The	methods	of	access
they’re	defending	require	decades	of	devotion,	dedication	and	privation,	with	no
serious	likelihood	of	success.	Would	you	want	to	jump	into	a	rowboat	and	start
paddling	across	the	Atlantic	despite	terrible	hardship	and	struggle	and	the	near
certainty	of	failure,	or	jump	on	a	plane	and	be	in	Paris	tonight?	Anyway,	your	dad
sidestepped	the	entire	issue	by	defining	the	standard	as	free	and	easy	access	for
everyone.	When	you	put	it	that	way,	you	instantly	sweep	everyone	else	off	the	table.
It	doesn’t	leave	room	for	discussion	or	debate.”
	
“What	about	the	harmful	effects	you	hear	about?”
	
“Of	LSD?	Neither	of	us	were	aware	of	any	worth	mentioning.	Plenty	of	anecdotal
reports,	 scare	 tactics,	 problems	 with	 disturbed	 or	 unbalanced	 people,	 with
irresponsible	usage,	with	use	in	non-conducive	settings.	There’s	no	doubt	we’re
talking	about	a	very	powerful	substance,	capable	of	completely	revolutionizing
someone’s	 understanding	 of	 reality	 in	 a	 few	 hours.	 It’s	 probably	 prudent	 to
approach	it	with	some	respect.”
	
“Really?”
	
“Listen,	I’m	not	an	LSD	expert	or	advocate,	that’s	not	my	thing	at	all,	but	I’ll	say
this;	of	the	many	hours	I	spent	in	your	dad’s	library,	much	of	it	was	focused	on	the
anti-LSD	 material,	 and	 I	 was	 very	 unimpressed.	 I	 have	 a	 very	 good	 nose	 for

=== Page 114 ===
bullshit,	and	the	anti-LSD	material	reeked	of	it.	You’re	now	the	owner	of	that
library	so	you	can	look	into	it	for	yourself	if	you’re	interested,	but	I	don’t	think
you’ll	find	much	in	the	way	of	a	downside	to	responsible	LSD	use	except	bad
trips.”
	
“But	they	can	be	pretty	awful,	can’t	they?”
	
“I	guess	so,	but	that	seems	more	a	factor	of	your	own	internal	environment	and	not
the	agent	that	got	you	there.	Your	father	said	you	can’t	blame	the	key	if	you	don’t
like	what’s	on	the	other	side	of	the	door.
	
“Just	to	be	clear,	your	dad	wasn’t	talking	about	some	new	and	exciting	recreational
activity	we	could	add	to	our	current	list	of	diversionary	pastimes.	He	wasn’t	talking
about	escapism	in	the	way	that	drugs	are	used	in	the	West.	He	was	talking	about
reclaiming	our	natural	birthright,	our	sacred	heritage.	It’s	a	little	funny,	in	1984,	it
talks	about	a	society	of	peace,	brotherhood,	equality	that	could	have	been	created
but	wasn’t.	‘The	earthly	paradise	had	been	discredited	at	exactly	the	moment	when
it	became	realizable.’	That’s	what	your	dad	was	talking	about.	An	earthly	paradise
was	 his	 vision,	 and	 it	 was	 discredited	 exactly	 at	 the	 moment	 when	 it	 became
realizable.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
We	walk	in	silence.	I	think	about	these	two	versions	of	a	transformed	humanity	I’ve
looked	at	in	the	last	few	months:	Bob’s	view	that	people	can	make	this	transition	on
their	own	through	techniques	and	realization,	and	Frank’s	view	that	LSD	is	the	key
that	can	throw	the	door	open	for	everyone.	Bob’s	completely	unfounded	views	are
just	a	load	of	what	Brett	called	happy	horseshit,	meant	to	calm	spiritual	stirrings,
and	maybe	turn	a	buck	and	strike	a	pose	while	doing	it.	Frank	started	with	a	utopian
ideal	based	on	Bucke’s	book,	and	did	the	courageous	thing	by	following	the	facts
wherever	they	led.	Bob’s	idea	is	juvenile	nonsense	and	Frank’s	idea	is	at	least
plausible	in	theory,	but	what	they	have	in	common	is	that	neither	will	ever	come	to
pass.
	
And	it’s	not	really	desirable	that	they	should.	It’s	natural	that	we	should	want
something	better,	but	it	doesn’t	necessarily	follow	that	we	know	what	that	would	be,
or	that	we	should	have	it.	If	I	had	to	pick	a	winner	in	this	contest	of	views,	it
wouldn’t	be	Frank	or	Bob,	but	Lisa.	Joe	Banks,	not	Tim	Leary	or	the	Dalai	Lama.
One	person	making	a	break,	drawing	a	line,	that’s	where	the	best	thing	in	the	world
happens;	not	in	groups	or	in	societies,	but	in	individuals.

=== Page 115 ===
	
It’s	interesting	to	note	that	Bob’s	views	will	probably	be	well	received	and	that
Frank’s	balanced	and	heavily	documented	views	would	have	caused	him	to	be
scorned	out	of	his	career	and	ostracized	by	society.	Go	Maya.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“Why	were	you	so	focused	on	the	negative	material?”	Lisa	asks.	“Weren’t	you
trying	to	write	about	the	golden	key	and	the	golden	door	and	everything?”
	
“No,	not	really.	That	was	more	your	dad’s	thing.	He	wanted	to	construct	some	sort
of	quasi-academic	document	that	would	turn	the	world	on	its	head.	I	didn’t	need	to
be	convinced,	and	I’m	really	not	that	interested.	What’s	interesting	to	me	is	how
quickly	and	effectively	that	door	got	slammed	shut.	That’s	Maya	at	work.	That’s
what	interests	me;	the	raw	power	and	cunning	of	fear.	I’m	not	writing	a	book	about
how	great	expanded	awareness	is;	there	are	plenty	of	those.	I	want	to	look	at	how
great	the	enemy	of	awakening	is.	It’s	interesting	to	observe	Maya	in	people,	in	ego,
but	it’s	been	a	real	education	to	isolate	and	observe	Maya’s	reaction	to	this	very
potent	threat	to	her	dominion.	Not	thousands	of	years	ago	in	a	foreign	land	when	no
one	wrote	anything	down	and	you	have	to	try	to	unravel	an	absurd	mythology,	but	a
few	years	ago,	right	here,	and	documented	from	every	angle	to	the	nth	degree.	It’s
been	like	this	specialized	branch	of	anthropology	that	focuses	on	understanding	the
ego	and	its	fascinating	talent	for	self-preservation.	Fun	for	me	and	good	for	the	third
book.	All	thanks	to	your	dad.”
	
“I’m	starting	to	think	he	really	was	a	bit	of	a	crackpot.”
	
“Maybe	he	was,	but	what	I	found	in	all	this	is	that	there	were	hundreds	of	so-called
visionaries	in	this	period,	the	sixties,	but	compared	to	your	dad	they	were	mostly
very	small-thinking	and	short-sighted.	I’m	sorry	your	father	never	got	to	write
Cosmic	Consciousness	II.	I	don’t	think	it	would	have	been	well-received	by	the
world,	but	that	would	be	a	reflection	on	the	world,	not	your	father	or	his	subject.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Lisa	and	I	have	talked	about	where	she’s	going	next,	where	her	life	will	be	taking
her,	who	she’s	going	to	be	from	now	on	and	what	it’s	going	to	be	like.	She	has	a
curiosity	about	her	future	that	ranges	from	anxious	to	excited.
	

=== Page 116 ===
She’s	feeling	homeless,	which	is	something	she’s	never	felt	before.	She	thinks	the
solution	is	to	find	a	home,	and	I’m	trying	to	help	her	see	that	the	solution	is	getting
comfortable	with	not	having	one,	or	with	being	at	home	everywhere.	She	wants	to
get	back	to	where	she	belongs,	and	isn’t	happy	to	hear	that	there	is	no	such	place.
	
Her	dad	and	I	talked	about	this	sort	of	transcending	into	homelessness	with	regard
to	LSD	and	kids	in	the	sixties.	How	ya	gonna	keep	‘em	down	on	the	farm	after
they’ve	seen	God?	After	they’ve	been	God?	Suddenly,	people	were	being	rocketed
out	of	their	mundane	realities	into	phantasmagorical	realms	of	hyper-awareness,
setting	themselves,	in	the	process,	adrift.
	
“Where	do	I	go	from	here?”	many	must	have	asked	themselves	in	quiet	moments.
“I’ve	destroyed	one	world,	so	now	what?	Obviously	I	don’t	go	back	to	school	to
become	an	accountant	or	an	engineer	or	a	lawyer	now	that	I	know,	beyond	any
possibility	of	doubt,	that	what	my	parents	call	life	is	just	cheap	shadowplay,	so
where	do	I	go?”
	
They	needed	some	understanding	of	this	new	level	of	reality	they	found	themselves
in,	some	framework	within	which	to	take	refuge	and	assimilate	their	transpersonal,
trans-human	trans-everything	experiences,	and	they	weren’t	finding	any	manuals	of
higher	consciousness	on	mom	and	dad’s	bookshelves.	They	were	catapulted	so	far
beyond	the	paradigm	of	their	parents	that	they	were	like	a	new	and	unprecedented
order	of	beings.	Leary’s	admonition	to	turn	on,	tune	in,	and	drop	out	was	fine	as	far
as	it	went,	which	was	exactly	nowhere.	Dropping	out	was	the	easy	part.	The	hard
part	is	that	when	you	drop	out	of	one	thing,	you	have	to	drop	into	another,	and	there
was	no	other	thing.	City	parks	and	crash-pads	and	Volkswagen	buses	do	not	make
for	an	inhabitable	paradigm.	A	new	social	strata	of	indigent	mystics	and	sidewalk
gurus	was	certain	to	not	long	endure.
	
“It’s	a	completely	unique	event	in	our	history,”	said	Frank.	“Where	else	can	you	see
anything	remotely	close	in	the	annals	of	human	consciousness?	The	genie	got	out	of
the	bottle	and	for	a	little	while	free	and	easy	access	for	everyone	was	a	reality.	Not
for	long,	but	it	was	there,	an	emerging	new	religion	with	an	authentic	sacrament
instead	of	a	symbolic	sacrament.	But	then	the	genie	got	crammed	back	into	the
bottle	and	the	bottle	was	labeled	poison	and	buried	so	deep	it	might	be	many
generations	before	it’s	seen	again.”
	
One	of	the	questions	Frank	and	I	played	with	was,	Where	are	they	now?	Now	we’re
looking	back	at	the	whole	thing	from	the	perspective	of	time,	where	did	they	all	go?
	

=== Page 117 ===
Back	to	the	farm,	we	concluded.	Where	else?	They	had	to	break	back	into	the
cuckoo’s	 nest,	 reintegrate	 themselves	 into	 the	 combine,	 reassimilate	 themselves
with	the	herd.	Like	Cypher,	the	traitor	in	The	Matrix,	they	had	to	weasel	their	ways
back	in	and	make	arrangements	for	their	memories.	Frank	talked	to	me	for	two
hours	one	night	about	memory	and	about	how	we	are	all	historical	revisionists	in
our	own	heads.	I	remember	that	at	the	time	it	sounded	like	the	mutability	of	the	past
Big	Brother	was	able	to	impose	on	the	citizens	of	Oceania.	Maybe	Maya	has	the
same	thing,	I	remember	thinking,	or	maybe	I	only	think	I	remember	thinking	it.
	
Not	all	of	the	godlings	underwent	repatriation.	Some	found	comfort	and	community
in	smaller	satellite	herds	loosely	united	under	the	catch-all	New	Age	banner,	but
that’s	just	a	petty	vanity;	all	sheep	in	herd	orbit,	no	matter	how	far	out,	are	still	part
of	the	herd.	Maya	is	the	good	shepherd,	and	few	if	any	head	were	lost.
	
“So	here	we	are,”	said	Frank,	“four	decades	later	looking	back	on	it,	and	what	do
we	see?	A	few	signs	of	impact	in	the	old	world,	a	few	secondary	revolutions—
feminist,	sexual,	racial—but	no	new	world	ever	sprang	up	out	of	it.	It	never	took
root.	It	never	had	a	chance.”
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
