# Visionary Goofballs

Visionary	Goofballs
	
Today	a	young	man	on	acid	realized	that	all	matter	is	merely	energy	condensed	to	a
slow	vibration,	that	we	are	all	one	consciousness	experiencing	itself	subjectively,
there	is	no	such	thing	as	death,	life	is	only	a	dream,	and	we	are	the	imagination	of
ourselves.	Here’s	Tom	with	the	weather.
	
Bill	Hicks
	
	
Bucke	and	Frank
	were	both	a	bit	goofy	in	their	own	ways.	Bucke	envisioned	a
future	of	socialism,	personal	aircraft,	the	end	of	cities,	and	eventually,	a	race	of
morally	 superior	 people	 possessed	 of	 the	 cosmic	 sense,	 which	 he	 expected	 to
develop	in	man	over	time,	like	color	perception,	becoming	a	race-wide	faculty	over
a	few	thousand	years.
	

=== Page 118 ===
Bucke	was	a	friend	and	admirer	of	Whitman,	but	never	went	further	than	that.	He
never	most	honored	Whitman’s	style:
	
He	most	honors	my	style	who	learns	under	it	to	destroy	the	teacher.
	
That’s	the	finger	pointing	at	the	moon	thing.	Bucke	couldn’t	honor	Whitman’s	style
that	way;	he	could	only	praise	and	admire	the	finger.	Whitman	was	saying	to	the
reader,	to	Bucke,	to	us,	this	is	your	journey:
	
Not	I	–	not	anyone	else,	can	travel	that	road	for	you,
You	must	travel	it	for	yourself.
	
Neither	Bucke	nor	Frank	ever	traveled	that	road.	They	both	stopped.	They	both	dug
in	and	became	self-appointed	spokesmen	for	a	journey	they	never	took,	making
optimistic	guesses	and	extrapolating	futures	they	would	never	see.	Were	either	of
them	right?	I	don’t	know.	Ask	me	again	in	a	few	thousand	years.	Although	neither
of	them	knew	it,	the	question	they	were	trying	to	answer	boils	down	to	this:	Can
fear	be	replaced	as	the	binding	agent	that	holds	the	dreamstate	together?	Is	there
another	core	emotion	of	sufficient	intensity	to	keep	this	whole	thing	lit	up?	And
both	 these	 men,	 in	 their	 different	 ways,	 and	 without	 really	 understanding	 the
question,	said	yes.
	
Me,	I	don’t	think	so.	I	know	Maya	pretty	well	and	I	don’t	see	her	ever	losing	more
than	the	occasional	stray.	A	species-wide	transformation	is	a	pretty	idea,	but	we
have	little	cause	for	optimism	and	plenty	for	pessimism.	It’s	nice	to	think	we	could
elevate	ourselves,	and	it’s	fun	to	dabble	in	theoretical	scenarios,	but	the	reality	is
that	man	will	never	evolve	or	transcend	or	develop	beyond	his	past	and	present
level.
	
If	that	sounds	like	a	bad	thing	to	us,	if	Maya	sounds	like	a	force	of	evil,	if	the	terms
by	which	man	lives	on	this	planet	seem	too	oppressive	or	restrictive,	then	we	might
do	well	to	take	a	step	back	and	reevaluate	the	situation.	Where	are	we?	What	is	this
place?	Is	it	a	prison	to	be	despised	or	an	amusement	park	to	be	explored	and
enjoyed?	Is	ego	a	hideous	affliction?	Or	is	it	simply	the	vehicle	that	allows	us	to
come	out	and	play?	When	the	choice	is	between	no-self	and	false-self,	false-self
starts	looking	pretty	good,	and	despising	and	demonizing	it	starts	to	seem	pretty
ungrateful.
	
Maybe	there	are	other	planes	of	existence	and	maybe	the	inhabitants	of	those	higher
planes	 are	 of	 a	 more	 evolved,	 less	 benighted	 nature.	 Maybe	 this	 whole

=== Page 119 ===
physical/human	plane	is	just	the	coarsest	level	of	self-awareness,	a	kindergarten	in
that	larger,	subtler	dreamscape,	but	that’s	not	what	Frank	or	Bucke	were	talking
about	and,	beyond	the	obvious	mechanism-of-denial	reasons,	I	don’t	know	why
anyone	would	care	about	the	extended	forecast	anyway.	Life	isn’t	down	the	road	in
the	distant	mists	of	time.	The	game	is	afoot,	here,	now,	on	the	physical/human
plane.	Most	people	get	through	the	day	by	believing	that	if	they	don’t	break	too
many	rules	too	much,	they	automatically	get	promoted	up	through	the	ranks;	be	it
one	life	and	straight	to	the	top	or	a	climb	of	many	smaller	steps.	This	comes	to	us
from	Maya’s	Ministry	of	Deferral	&	Procrastination,	which	promotes	a	doctrine	of
plausible	 denial	 and	 applied	 non-aggression,	 and	 where	 the	 motto	 is	 Rock	 the
Cradle,	Not	the	Boat.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Lily	Tomlin	said	the	problem	with	being	in	the	rat	race	is	that	even	if	you	win,
you’re	still	a	rat.	To	my	way	of	thinking,	the	problem	with	being	in	the	human	race
is	that	even	if	you	win,	you’re	still	a	human.	Let’s	pretend	for	a	moment	that	we’re
not,	as	a	race,	a	mere	tweak	or	two	from	perfection,	but	a	cataclysmic	makeover
away.	Let’s	say,	for	the	sake	of	argument,	that	the	way	humanity	is	now	is	nowhere
close	to	what	it	could	be,	that	we’re	nowhere	in	the	vicinity	of	what	we	might
become,	that	we’re	morbidly	mired	at	the	shitty	end	of	the	potential	spectrum.	It
certainly	seems	that	the	light	of	human	consciousness	is	at	its	lowest	possible
setting	and	cannot	be	further	dimmed,	so	at	least	there’s	cause	for	optimism:	it	can’t
get	any	worse.	Maybe	it	just	has	to	get	a	little	brighter,	just	a	smidge,	and	then	some
positive	tipping	point	is	reached	and	the	whole	thing	lights	up	like	day	and	these
dark	ages	are	only	remembered	for	their	slow-dissolving	steel	and	concrete.	Man
can	crawl	out	of	the	lightless	tarpits	of	religion	and	spirituality	the	way	our	distant
ancestors	crawled	out	of	the	oceans	and	some	version	of	Frank’s	crazy-ass	New
World	could	evolve,	populated	by	integrated,	empathetic/sympathetic,	awake/aware,
whole-brained,	fully	conscious,	open-eyed,	non-fear-based	humans.	I	doubt	it,	but	if
it	ever	happens,	it	will	only	happen	by	getting	people	through	that	door	that	Frank
saw,	and	there’s	no	doubt	that,	in	all	of	known	creation,	the	only	thing	that	might	be
called	the	Golden	Key,	that	might	offer	free	and	easy	access	for	everyone,	is	LSD.
	
That	is	one	of	the	two	important	lessons	we	can	take	from	this	psychedelic	episode
in	our	history,	the	sixties.	We	are,	without	a	doubt,	at	the	shitty	end	of	the	potential
spectrum.	Every	Tom,	Dick	and	Mary	got	to	travel	the	rest	of	the	spectrum	and	they
took	good	notes	and	that	is	what	we	learned.	You	don’t	have	to	be	“on	the	bus”	to
understand	 this,	 you	 only	 have	 to	 visit	 any	 reasonably	 well-stocked	 library	 or
bookstore	 and	 take	 an	 hour	 to	 see	 it	 for	 yourself;	 there	 are	 higher	 ranges	 of

=== Page 120 ===
consciousness	open	to	us,	and	from	there,	the	narrow	range	in	which	we	live	and	die
barely	registers	as	consciousness	at	all.
	
My	assistants	and	proofreaders	warn	me	that	people	don’t	like	to	hear	themselves
portrayed	so	negatively.	That	surprises	me.	I	would	think	that	most	folks,	if	they
took	a	minute	to	sit	down	and	really	think	about	it,	would	blubber	in	joyous	relief	to
find	out	that	what	they’d	been	calling	life	was	really	just	the	most	meager	level	of
subsistence	and	that	there	were	infinitudes	more	to	this	whole	thing	then	they’d
been	led	to	believe.
	
Just	to	give	you	the	merest	idea,	think	of	all	the	time	and	effort	and	energy	you	put
into	projecting	yourself	into	the	world,	into	playing	your	role,	into	being	you.	Then,
once	 you	 have	 some	 appreciation	 for	 what’s	 involved,	 imagine	 not	 doing	 it
anymore.	 Imagine	 if	 you	 could	 stop	 being	 you	 and	 just	 be.	 That’s	 kind	 of	 a
sideways	way	of	saying	something	really	central	to	this	whole	subject.	How	would
your	life	be	different	if	you	didn’t	have	to	keep	conjuring	yourself	into	existence
every	moment	and	just	existed?	And,	on	the	other	side	of	this	coin,	there’s	your
obligation	to	reflect	others	back	to	them	as	they	reflect	you	back	to	you.	What	if
you	broke	this	social	compact	of	mutual	ego-assurance?	What	if	you	could	just	drop
these	 two	 all-consuming	 activities?	 What	 if	 you	 withdrew	 all	 energy	 from	 the
fictional	character	you	play?	And	now,	what	if	everyone	did	it?
	
What	then?
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
The	point	Frank	sought	to	impress	upon	me	again	and	again,	the	point	that	he
seemed	to	find	most	incomprehensible,	most	galling,	was	that	those	higher	ranges
of	consciousness	being	denied	to	us	are	the	very	essence	of	who	and	what	we	are.
They	are	our	infinite	and	unbounded	selves,	and	they	are	closed	off	to	us	at	the	very
moment	in	history	when	they	first	became	open	to	us.
	
“That’s	all	any	of	this	is	about,”	he’d	often	repeat.	“Every	culture	in	history	has	had
their	method	of	accessing	the	great	within,	but	it	was	always	restricted	to	the	few,
the	elite,	renunciates,	shamans	and	the	like,	but	now,	for	the	first	time	ever,	we	have
it	in	our	power	to	make	it	freely	and	easily	available	to	everyone—everyone.	The
most	important	event	in	the	history	of	man	and	what	happens?	The	whole	world
rises	up	against	it.”
	

=== Page 121 ===
Leaving	us	with	the	crop	of	methods	we	currently	have,	methods	that	Maya	doesn’t
bother	 clamping	 down	 on	 because	 they	 pose	 no	 threat;	 that	 are,	 in	 fact,	 so
ineffectual	for	their	stated	usage	and	so	perfectly	suited	to	the	perpetuation	of
delusion,	that	we	can	know	without	doubt	from	whose	lineage	they	come	down	to
us.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Which	brings	us	to	the	more	important	lesson	the	sixties	have	to	offer:	Maya.	As
impressive	as	we	see	she	is	when	we	bother	to	look,	we	are	only	seeing	her	at	her
most	 relaxed	 state.	 Facing	 no	 serious	 threat,	 she	 operates	 at	 only	 a	 minimal
readiness	level.	She	is	like	a	sleeping	giant	who	can	do	her	job	without	being	any
more	alert	than	those	over	whom	she	watches.	But	when	an	escape	attempt	is
launched	that	has	the	potential	to	set	the	captives	free	in	any	serious	numbers,	an
event	we’ve	only	seen	once,	then	the	attentive	observer	is	rewarded	with	a	glimpse
of	what	Maya	is	really	capable;	a	very	impressive	sight.	Bringing	perhaps	only	a
fraction	of	her	offensive	might	to	bear,	she	slammed	the	door	shut,	sealed	it	tight,
plastered	it	out	of	visible	existence,	and	labeled	the	area	radioactively	contaminated
so	the	herd	steers	well	clear,	effectively	turning	humanity	rabidly	against	the	only
thing	that	might,	with	a	straight	face,	be	called	a	practicable	road	to	salvation.	LSD
provided	the	one	and	only	serious	offensive	assault	against	Maya	and	without	much
fuss	or	bother	she	rose	to	the	challenge	and	quelled	the	uprising,	swatting	it	like	a
bug	 and	 settling	 back	 into	 her	 light	 doze.	 She	 villanized,	 demonized,	 and
criminalized	the	entheogenic	class	of	substances	so	effectively	that	here	we	are	now,
a	few	decades	later,	and	all	that	can	really	be	said	of	mankind’s	one	chance	for
liberation	is	that	a	hole	in	the	wall	was	brought	to	the	attention	of	the	warden,	and
promptly	repaired.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
A	young	country	with	boundless	idealism,	poetic	vision,	and	virtually	limitless
wealth,	 burning	 with	 words	 like	 freedom	 and	 expansion	 and	 exploration,	 with
phrases	 like	 all	 men	 are	 created	 equal,	 and	 inalienable	 rights,	 and	 pursuit	 of
happiness;	that’s	a	place,	said	Frank,	where	good	things	could	happen.
	
“What	is	a	Declaration	of	Independence	itself	except	an	act	of	rebellion?”	he	asked.
“It’s	a	revolutionary	decree;	a	response	to	what	it	calls	an	absolute	tyranny.	It’s	a
declaration	of	war.	Where’s	that	spirit	today?	It	doesn’t	exist.	I’m	proof	of	that.	If	I
never	stood	up	and	said	something,	who	will?	We	are	a	vanquished,	broken	people.
We	are	slaves.”

=== Page 122 ===
	
That’s	how	he	talked	sometimes.
	
“Whenever	 any	 form	 of	 government	 becomes	 destructive	 of	 these	 ends,”	 he
continued,	lifting	his	glass,	“it	is	the	right	of	the	people	to	alter	or	to	abolish	it,	and
to	institute	new	government.”
	
“Declaration	of	Independence?”	I	asked.
	
He	nodded	solemnly	with	a	muffled	belch.
	
Revolution	is	the	overthrow	of	a	tyrannical	oppressor.	Whether	individually	or
collectively,	it	is	the	ultimate	expression	of	discontent.	Revolutions	start	small	and
rely	perforce	on	guerrilla	tactics.	They	begin	with	treasonous	plotters	meeting	in
barns	 and	 back	 rooms.	 The	 enemy	 faced	 by	 these	 uppity	 peasants	 consists	 of
established	governments,	standing	armies,	courts,	established	order,	fearful	family,
the	press,	and	an	intelligence	apparatus	capable	of	rooting	out	insurgency	before	it
moves	beyond	the	pitchfork	and	birdgun	stage.
	
Of	course,	when	it’s	just	a	conflict	between	oppressed	citizens	and	their	oppressive
governments,	or	between	inmates	and	prison	staff,	that’s	merely	the	dreamstate
shadow	of	the	real	process	of	revolution;	the	personal	declaration	of	independence,
the	individual	bid	for	freedom,	the	one	true	war	of	which	all	others	are	but	shadows.
	
If	you	were	the	tyrannical	oppressor,	it	would	be	your	job	to	avoid	an	uprising	and
maintain	order.	That’s	not	really	very	difficult	because	we,	the	people,	actually	want
to	be	oppressed.	We	just	don’t	want	it	too	get	so	uncomfortable	that	we’d	prefer
death	to	continued	oppression.	The	art	and	science	of	tyrannical	oppression	is	to
bind	 the	 spirit,	 but	 not	 so	 much	 that	 death	 becomes	 preferable	 to	 continued
bondage.	 As	 America’s	 founding	 fathers	 knew,	 it’s	 easy	 to	 keep	 people	 from
choosing	death:
	
“…
all	Experience	hath	shewn,	that	Mankind	are	more	disposed	to	suffer,	while
Evils	are	sufferable,	than	to	right	themselves	by	abolishing	the	Forms	to	which	they
are	accustomed.”
	
U.S.	Declaration	of	Independence
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	

=== Page 123 ===
In	Frank’s	entheogenic	revolution,	however,	it’s	not	so	much	a	matter	of	the	current
regime	being	insufferably	oppressive	as	it	is	of	the	new	regime	being	so	mind-
bogglingly	superior	that	present	conditions	seem	like	life	in	a	coffin	by	comparison.
That’s	why	the	little	revolution	of	the	sixties	sputtered	and	died;	not	because	Maya
is	invincible,	but	because	desire	is	a	very	weak	agent	of	change.	And	if	we	can
understand	why	that	doomed	it	from	the	start,	we	can	also	understand	why	any
attempt	to	launch	a	personal	revolution	pulled	by	desire	rather	than	pushed	by
insufferable	discontent	is	similarly	doomed,	and	why	Frank’s	revolution	failed	and
Lisa’s	succeeded.
	
Personal	 revolution	 is	 fueled	 by	 emotional	 energy	 of	 the	 purest	 intensity.	 That
intensity	comes	from	focus	and	that	kind	of	focused	emotional	energy	doesn’t	look
like	 love	 or	 tranquility	 or	 compassion.	 It	 looks	 like	 seething	 rage	 or	 severe
psychosis.	It’s	an	ugly	fact	of	an	ugly	business,	but	that’s	how	it	works.	Suicidal
discontent;	that’s	how	revolutions	are	won	and	that’s	why	they	so	seldom	are.
Rockets	aren’t	launched	into	space	on	chanting	and	prayers,	and	escaping	the	ego’s
gravity	requires	an	equivalent	amount	of	explosive	force.	We	have	to	take	all	the
emotional	 energy	 we	 normally	 blast	 out	 in	 a	 thousand	 directions	 to	 keep	 our
dreamstate	characters	animated	and	focus	it	on	a	single	point.	It’s	all	or	nothing.
	
This	is	the	kind	of	stuff	Frank	and	I	discussed	now	and	then.	He’d	spent	his	life
quietly	wondering	where	his	beloved	revolution	went	wrong,	how	the	LSD-based
transcendence	of	the	species	he’d	watched	unfolding	ended	up	failing	so	miserably.
I	know	he	came	to	understand	the	whole	thing	better	by	discussing	it	with	me,	but	I
don’t	think	that	made	him	any	happier	about	it.	The	way	he	saw	it,	the	war	was
over,	the	good	guys	lost,	and	history	is	written	by	the	winners.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Standard	religions	and	belief	systems,	whether	orthodox	or	unorthodox,	mainstream
or	whacko,	serve	to	keep	the	herd	together	and	heading	slowly	nowhere	in	an
orderly	manner.	Whether	we	believe	in	something	or	believe	we	don’t	believe	in
anything	makes	no	difference.	All	beliefs	are	the	same	belief.	There	is	only	the
herd.
	
There	are	always	those	who	aren’t	content	within	the	herd	and	seek	something	more
than	mindless	plodding	and	grazing	and	humping.	They	peel	themselves	away	and
form	subherds	that	travel	apart	but	alongside,	independent	in	belief	and	appearance
only.	There	are	also	the	occasional	stragglers	and	strays,	but	the	trick	to	keeping
loose	stock	with	the	herd,	the	good	shepherd	knows,	is	to	let	them	stray.	They	won’t

=== Page 124 ===
go	far.	Where	would	they	go?	What	is	commonly	thought	of	as	the	herd	is	really
just	the	core	herd.	There	is	a	larger,	more	scattered	herd	that	becomes	visible	as	our
elevation	increases	and	our	perspective	broadens.	Those	at	the	outermost	fringes,	to
the	sides	or	far	out	front,	are	no	less	a	part	of	the	herd	than	those	at	the	heart,
they’re	just	indulging	in	a	bit	of	egoic	self-gratification.	Draw	back	far	enough	and
we	see	that	everyone	is	plodding	in	the	same	aimless	direction	at	the	same	shuffling
pace,	and	that	the	very	idea	of	a	radical	or	a	revolutionary	or	a	bold	explorer	is
nothing	more	than	a	petty	conceit.	There	are	no	explorers,	there	is	no	spirit	of
exploration,	there	is	no	courage,	there	is	no	freedom	or	love	of	freedom.
	
There	is	only	the	herd.
	
Every	once	in	a	while	a	single	beast	does	leave	the	herd.	Never	a	group	or	even	a
pair.	Where	there’s	more	than	one,	there’s	the	herd.	They	only	go,	when	they	go,
one	at	a	time.	And	where	do	they	go?	Over	the	edge,	of	course.	Where	else?	There
are	only	two	choices;	the	herd	and	over	the	edge.
	
There	is	only	the	herd.
	
And	there	is	no	herd.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
I’ve	said	that	when	I	was	young,	I	never	found	anyone	I	would	have	wanted	to	be
like.	Not	only	didn’t	I	know	anyone,	I	didn’t	know	of	anyone.	There	was	no	success
that	looked	like	success	to	me,	there	was	no	accomplishment	that	seemed	worth	the
bother.	The	only	thing	I	ever	remember	thinking	might	be	a	good	way	to	spend	a
life	 was	 as	 a	 failed	 poet;	 kind	 of	 like	 the	 village	 idiot	 but	 without	 the	 civic
responsibilities.	The	idea	of	being	a	successful	poet	held	no	charm,	but	being	a
failure	as	a	poet	had	a	nice	feel	to	it.	A	one-man	revolution;	certain	to	fail,	but	for	a
good	cause.	Anyway,	as	I	think	about	it	now,	I	think	I	like	what	Frank	and	Bucke
did—or	almost	did,	or	tried	to	do,	or	thought	about	doing—with	their	lives	and	their
wise,	foolish,	impossible	dreams.	They	were	failed	poets	in	the	way	that	I	mean	it,
and	if	my	life	had	gone	another	way	I	think	I	would	have	been	content	to	be	like
them.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	

=== Page 125 ===
