# Nothing Forever

Nothing	Forever,	(though	I	know	it	can’t	not
be).	There	must	be	something	somewhere,	(though	I	know	there’s	not).	I	have	to
see.	I	have	to	look	for	myself.
	
Where	are	the	people?	The	cities?	Where	are	the	churches?	Where	are	the	statues
and	icons?	Where	are	the	great	philosophies	and	belief	systems?	Surely	they	must
have	survived.	Who	am	I	to	be	here	alone?	Where	are	all	the	smart	ones?	The	ones
who	seemed	so	serious,	so	stable	and	deeply-rooted	and	tightly	wrapped?	So	real?
Where	are	the	ones	with	the	strong	beliefs	and	complex	philosophies?	Why	aren’t
they	here?	Where	are	the	heroes?	This	is	a	place	where	there	should	be	heroic	men
and	women.	The	best	of	the	best	should	be	here,	the	smartest,	the	bravest,	the	most
devout,	the	truest.	Where	are	they?	Where	are	the	signs	that	they’ve	been	here?	It

=== Page 126 ===
can’t	just	be	me.	There	must	be	others.	I	couldn’t	believe	I	was	all	alone	on	this
desolate	planet,	so	I	went	off	to	have	a	look	around.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
I	went	to	philosophy.	What	had	been	entire	libraries	of	man’s	collected	wisdom,
including	all	that	ancient	Greek	stuff	and	all	those	Europeans	from	the	last	few
centuries	with	their	humongous	brains	and	their	gigantic	thoughts.	Where	was	all
that	now?	Gone	as	if	it	never	was.	Washed	away	like	sandcastles	on	the	beach.	All
that	was	left	where	I	expected	to	find	Great	Minds	and	Great	Thoughts	was	a
blueprint	for	a	bomb	like	the	one	that	had	done	this	to	my	world:	Cogito	Ergo	Sum.
	
So,	I	wondered,	where	was	René	Descartes?	I	should	be	able	to	find	more	of	him
than	those	three	words.	But	no.	I	discovered	that	even	the	guy	who	created	such	a
bomb	didn’t	know	what	it	really	was	or	what	it	could	really	do;	he	built	the	bomb
but	he	never	set	it	off	in	his	own	life.
	
I	went	to	religion.	Any	religion,	denomination,	cult	or	sect	would	do;	anything	that
was	still	standing	in	this	flattened	world	would	be	a	welcome	and	amazing	sight,
but	nothing	was.	All	the	books	and	statues	and	fancy	clothes	and	beautiful	buildings
were	vaporized.	Nowhere	was	one	stone	left	on	top	of	another.	I	was	stunned,	but
not	surprised.
	
I	went	to	the	occult	and	the	New	Age,	to	spirituality	and	Eastern	thought.	By	this
time	my	eyes	had	become	well-adjusted	to	the	bright	light	of	this	new	world	and	I
could	fully	absorb	in	a	moment	what	it	might	once	have	taken	years	to	see.	There
were	others	like	me,	I	saw,	but	few.	They	were	easier	to	make	out	now	that	all	the
pretenders	had	been	vaporized.	Still,	I	wasn’t	there	to	learn	or	to	acquire	or	to
master	anything.	I	had	no	desire	to	become	a	student.	This	wasn’t	a	scholarly	or
theological	pursuit.	I	had	no	need	for	a	vehicle.	I	wasn’t	curious	about	teachings	and
philosophies	 and	 beliefs	 beyond	 the	 initial	 assessment	 of	 whether	 or	 not	 they
survived	the	blast.	I	was	just	looking	to	see	if	there	was	anything	still	standing,	and
there	wasn’t	much.	Not	nothing,	but	not	much.
	
As	 long	 as	 I	 was	 in	 the	 neighborhood	 I	 looked	 in	 on	 Buddhism,	 but	 all	 that
remained	 was	 the	 diamond	 of	 Zen	 under	 an	 ash	 mountain	 of	 faux-Zen.	 I	 was
interested	to	finally	see	it	in	clarity,	but	real	Zen	is	just	another	name	for	the	bomb,
and	there	was	nothing	left	to	blow	up.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

=== Page 127 ===
	
All	that	scorched-earth	wandering	wasn’t	the	end,	it	was	just	the	beginning.	I	still
had	my	own	personal	deconstruction	to	do,	which	is	how	I	spent	almost	the	next
two	years,	until	I	got	to	a	place	called	Done.
	
The	external	searching	is	only	one	part	of	the	story.	The	other	part	is	the	internal
part;	 the	 slow,	 painful	 sloughing	 away	 of	 self,	 layer	 by	 layer,	 piece	 by	 piece.
Spiritual	self-debridement.	Some	layers	of	selfhood	just	fall	away,	some	tear	off	in
long	strips	or	flabby	hunks,	and	some	have	to	be	meticulously,	pain-stakingly;
surgically	 removed.	 Everything	 I	 had	 become	 in	 decades	 of	 life	 I	 now	 had	 to
unbecome.	All	I	really	was	was	belief,	so	everything	I	believed	I	now	had	to
unbelieve.	My	new	world	was	cold	and	bright	and	honest,	but	my	old	mind	was	still
full	of	a	lifetime’s	accumulation	of	belief	and	opinion	and	false	knowledge	and
emotional	attachment—all	the	noxious	debris	and	toxic	waste	that	make	up	the	ego
—and	it	all	had	to	go.	That’s	a	process	and	it	takes	time.	The	world	might	be
annihilated	in	a	flash,	but	self	takes	a	little	longer	to	burn	away.	There’s	no	bomb
for	that.	There’s	no	pretty	Latin	phrase	or	Sanskrit	mantra	that	annihilates	self
quickly	or	painlessly.	There’s	no	realization	or	insight	or	epiphany	that	wipes	away
the	false	self	in	a	flash.	Those	who	claim	to	have	awakened	in	a	flash	are	the	most
deluded	of	all.
	
Then	it	was	time	for	the	mountain	to	be	a	mountain	again.	I	spent	the	next	ten	years
trying	to	make	sense	of	this	new	world;	a	non-world	in	which	a	non-I	nevertheless
seemed	to	reside.	The	waking	dreamstate.	It	was	like	the	world	had	turned	from
hard	solidity	into	shimmering	mirage.	I	could	still	see	the	world	I	had	always
known,	but	I	could	not	find	its	substance.	Whatever	I	reached	out	to	touch,	my	hand
passed	through.	Whatever	I	thought	about	dissolved	in	my	mind.	Whoever	I	looked
at,	I	saw	through	like	vapor,	myself	included.	I	looked	at	my	own	character,	and	it
was	like	a	face	you	see	in	a	cloud	for	a	second	before	it’s	gone.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
My	reality	now	is	the	awakened,	untruth-unrealized	state,	and	it’s	the	same	for	me
as	for	anyone	who	comes	to	it.	There	are	no	masters	or	novices	here.	There	are	no
teachings	or	beliefs;	no	Hindus	or	Buddhists	or	Jnanis	or	Advaitins;	no	masters	or
yogis	or	swamis;	no	discorporate	entities	or	higher	level	energies	or	superior	beings.
Awake	is	awake.	Everything	else	is	everything	else.
	
With	all	this	in	mind,	it	should	be	easy	to	understand	why	there	would	be	very	little
latitude	in	my	thinking	as	to	the	definition	of	Spiritual	Enlightenment.	Within	the

=== Page 128 ===
dreamstate	there	are	countless	shades	of	gray,	but	between	the	dreamstate	and	the
awakened	state	there	are	no	shades	at	all.	The	distinction	is	absolute:	Truth	exists.
Untruth	does	not.
	
This	is	enlightenment	theory—the	pure,	binary	mathematics	of	truth—and	it’s	very
simple;	as	easy	as	one,	two,	three,	but	without	the	two	and	the	three.	It’s	so	simple
and	obvious	that	you’d	have	to	close	your	eyes	and	bury	your	head	not	to	see	it.
	
Specifically,	you	would	need	some	mechanism	by	which	to	generate	an	energy	field
around	 yourself,	 an	 artificial	 micro-environment,	 a	 one-man	 spacecraft	 with	 an
interactive	 in-flight	 movie	 so	 engrossing	 that	 you	 could	 forget	 that	 you	 were
floating	alone	in	empty	space	and	believe	that	you	were	in	a	world	full	of	people
and	drama	and	meaning.
	
Which	is	exactly	the	case.
	
The	mechanism	by	which	you	accomplish	this	most	remarkable	of	all	feats	is	a
well-oiled	combination	of	emotion	and	intelligence.	Emotion	powers	the	energy
field,	Maya	is	the	ruling	intelligence,	the	in-flight	movie	is	called	Delusion.	and	this
ship	in	which	you	aimlessly	float	through	Nothing	Forever	is	called	Ego.
	
And	 when	 that	 soap	 bubble	 pops?	 When	 ego	 is	 destroyed?	 When	 Maya	 is
vanquished?	What	then?
	
Everything.
	
Who	then?
	
No	one.
	
It	should	now	be	easy	to	understand	that	a	true	and	complete	spiritual	teaching	can
be	conveyed	in	three	words,	while	those	that	require	entire	libraries	of	books	and
legions	of	graybearded	scholars	to	decrypt	them	can	succeed	only	in	producing	ever
more	darkness	and	confusion.	It	should	now	be	clear	that	there	are	no	cases	of
instant	enlightenment,	that	awakening	is	not	the	result	of	a	single	epiphany,	but	of	a
long,	arduous	journey	wherein	every	step	is	a	long,	arduous	journey.	It	should	now
be	obvious	that	all	dogma,	beliefs,	doctrines	and	philosophies	are	strictly	dreamstate
phenomenon	with	no	independent	existence	in	truth.	It	should	now	be	easy	to	look
at	any	teacher	or	teaching,	at	any	book,	at	any	spiritual	or	religious	assertion,	and	to
instantly	know	its	exact	and	certain	value.	It	should	now	be	easy	to	look	at	every

=== Page 129 ===
internal	thought,	belief	and	emotion	and	know	without	the	possibility	of	error	what
is	real	and	what	is	imagined.	It	should	now	be	clear	that	there	is	no	room	for	debate
or	opinion	with	regard	to	what	is	true	and	what	is	false.	The	distinction	is	absolute:
	
Truth	exists.	Untruth	does	not.
	
	
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
	

=== Page 130 ===
Wisefool	Press
	
The	Enlightenment	Trilogy
	
By	Jed	McKenna
	
Spiritual	Enlightenment:	The	Damnedest	Thing
	
Spiritually	Incorrect	Enlightenment
	
Spiritual	Warfare
	
&
	
Jed	McKenna’s	Notebook
All	Bonus	Content	from	The	Enlightenment	Trilogy
	
These	books	are	made	available	in	a	variety	of	print,	electronic	and	audio	formats,
and	in	other	languages	from	other	publishers.	Please	visit	our	website	for	more
information:
	
www.WisefoolPress.com
	
#	#	#
	
	