=== Page 2 ===
Jed	McKenna’s	Notebook
All	Bonus	Material	from	The	Enlightenment	Trilogy
	
Jed	McKenna
	
Smashwords	Edition
	
ISBN:	978-0-9801848-7-7
	
Copyright	©	2010	Wisefool	Press
All	rights	reserved.
	
No	part	of	this	book	may	be	reproduced	or	transmitted	in	any	form	or	by	any
means,	electronic	or	mechanical,	including	photocopying,	recording,	or	by	any
information	storage	or	retrieval	system	without	written	permission	of	the	author	or
publisher,	except	for	the	inclusion	of	brief	quotations	in	a	review.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Table	of	Contents
	
	
Bonus	Content	from
Spiritual	Enlightenment:	The	Damnedest	Thing
	
	
Recipe	for	Failure
Interview	with	Jed	McKenna
The	Deficiency	of	Recorded	Accounts
Dr.	Pillay	Interview
Impersonating	Jed	McKenna
Blues	for	Buddha
	
	
Bonus	Content	from
Spiritually	Incorrect	Enlightenment
	
	

=== Page 3 ===
Jed	McKenna	Interview
Zen	and	the	Art	of	Self-Mutilation
Mannahatta
	
	
Bonus	Content	from
Spiritual	Warfare
	
	
I,	Witness
The	New	World
The	Golden	Door
Visionary	Goofballs
Nothing	Forever:	A	Post-Apocalyptic	Lightmare
	
Wisefool	Press
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Those	who	know	how	to	think	need	no	teachers.
	
Mahatma	Gandhi
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Bonus	Content	from
Spiritual	Enlightenment:	The	Damnedest	Thing
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Recipe	for	Failure
	
In	the	knowledge	of	the	Atman,
which	is	the	dark	night	to	the	ignorant,

=== Page 4 ===
the	recollected	mind	is	fully	awake	and	aware.
	
The	ignorant	are	awake	in	their	sense-life,
which	is	darkness	to	the	sage.
	
Bhagavad	Gita
	
	
Kamiel	came	prepared
.	 He	 carries	 a	 bulging,	 well-worn,	 triple	 rubber-banded
notebook	full	of	thoughts,	ideas,	and	questions	accumulated	during	several	years	of
reading	spiritual	books,	attending	spiritual	gatherings,	and	participating	in	spiritual
internet	discussion	groups.
	
“A	lot	of	teachers,”	he	informs	me,	“say	that	the	necessary	first	step	in	awakening	is
dissatisfaction;	a	gnawing	discontentment	on	the	feeling	level.	Is	that	what	you
mean	when	you	talk	about	intent?”
	
Most	of	Kamiel’s	reading	in	recent	years	has	centered	on	the	works	of	Ramana
Maharshi,	Nisargadatta	Maharaj,	Ramesh	Balsekar,	Jean	Klein	and	that	whole	crew.
He	seems	philosophically	inclined	toward	the	peculiar	brand	of	nonduality	and	neo-
Advaita	Vedanta	that	attracts	a	growing	audience	these	days.	Its	allure	seems	based
on	its	simple	core	truth;	not-two.	While	not-two	is	not	exactly	true,	two	is	exactly
not	true,	and	therefore	succinctly	marks	the	endpoint	of	dualistic	thought;	you’d
think.	Where	nondual	enthusiasts	go	astray	is	in	trying	to	erect	a	philosophical
structure	atop	this	simple	truth.	Truth	is	always	simple	and	never	provides	the	basis
for	any	philosophy,	but	Kamiel	is	determined	to	believe	that	his	ramshackle	nondual
philosophy	 is	 structurally	 sound.	 I’ve	 explained	 to	 him	 that	 you	 can’t	 build	 a
philosophy	of	This	on	a	foundation	of	Not-This,	but	he	is	quite	attached	to	his
improbable	little	edifice	and	not	yet	ready	to	decamp.
	
Which	is	perfectly	fine.	Waking	up	is	a	stop-and-go	journey.	It	takes	a	lot	of	hard
work	to	reach	a	plateau	like	nonduality	and	pausing	to	rest	and	acclimatize	before
moving	on	is	part	of	the	process.	Nonduality	may	not	be	the	final	destination	new
arrivals	might	suppose,	but	getting	there	is	an	impressive	and	challenging	feat	and
the	views	are	rewarding	in	all	directions.	What’s	more,	I	like	Kamiel	and	generally
enjoy	talking	with	him.	He	asks	good	questions	that	elicit	interesting	answers.	I’m
usually	limited	to	speaking	in	monologues	rather	than	dialogues,	but	it’s	the	student
who	calls	the	tune	and	Kamiel	makes	a	good	job	of	it.
	

=== Page 5 ===
“Well,”	I	respond	after	thinking	about	his	question	a	bit,	“I	guess	it’s	a	matter	of
degree.	Let’s	try	out	a	new	analogy.	I’m	making	this	up	on	the	fly	so	bear	with	me.
Here’s	the	situation:	You’re	sitting	in	your	skyscraper	office	a	hundred	stories	off
the	ground	thinking	about	how	successful	you	are	and	how	your	life	is	just	grand.
With	me	so	far?	In	terms	of	satisfaction,	you’re	very	satisfied.	You	have	it	all;	fancy
office,	great	views,	the	respect	and	admiration	of	those	around	you,	everything	you
ever	wanted.	Okay?”
	
“Okay.”
	
“So,	you’re	like	that—happy,	content,	well-satisfied—for	however	long;	months,
years,	decades.	But	then	one	day,	for	whatever	reason,	dissatisfaction	begins	to
creep	in.	Something	about	your	office	starts	to	bug	you.	It	starts	with	little	things.
You’re	dissatisfied	with	your	curtains;	they	don’t	go	with	the	credenza	at	all.	‘What
was	I	thinking?’	you	wonder.	‘How	could	I	have	been	so	blind?’	And	now	that
you’re	looking	more	closely,	it’s	obvious	that	the	carpet	is	a	fiasco	and	the	artwork
is	just	an	embarrassment.	One	minute	you’re	happy,	the	next	minute	you’re	very
dissatisfied.	Extremely	dissatisfied.	This	office	is	simply	not	an	accurate	outward
representation	of	your	inner	professional.	You’ve	outgrown	it.”
	
“It	actually	sounds	like	a	pretty	cool	office.”
	
“Yes,	well,	that’s	what	everyone	else	thinks;	your	friends,	colleagues,	your	family.
They	think	you’ve	got	it	made	and	that	you’re	nuts	for	wanting	to	mess	with	it.	Of
course,	you’re	only	dissatisfied	when	you’re	in	the	office.	You	pretty	much	forget
about	it	when	you’re	anywhere	else.	Right?”
	
“Right.”
	
“And	you’re	following	the	analogy,	right?	These	things	can	be	a	bit	wobbly	the	first
time	out.	Your	office	represents	your	relationship	to	the	larger	questions	of	life	and
your	dissatisfaction	represents—”
	
“Got	it.”
	
“Good.	So	what’s	the	answer?	What	do	you	do	about	this	very	dissatisfying	office
of	yours?”
	
“Uh,	I	don’t	know,”	he	shrugs.	“Redecorate?”
	

=== Page 6 ===
“Yeah,	that	sounds	right.	But	this	time	you’re	going	to	be	very	serious	about	it.
You’re	going	to	bring	in	a	top-notch	decorator	and	strip	the	place	down	to	the
floorboards	and	start	from	scratch.	You’re	not	going	to	be	a	mere	dabbler;	you’re
going	all	the	way	with	this.	You’re	a	serious	professional	and	you	deserve	a	serious
office.	See	what	I	mean?	See	how	what	started	as	a	gnawing	little	dissatisfaction
has	grown	into	a	life-transforming	event?”
	
“Okay,”	he	says	dutifully.
	
“So	that’s	what	you	do.	You	go	out	and	buy	books	and	magazines	on	interior
design.	 You	 talk	 to	 people	 and	 attend	 lectures	 and	 events.	 You	 hire	 the	 best
decorator	you	can	find;	someone	you	resonate	with	deeply.	You	yourself	are	being
transformed	by	this	experience.	You	yourself	are	growing,	developing,	expanding.
It’s	very	challenging,	but	you’re	taking	a	no-nonsense	approach.	It’s	slow	going,	but
little	by	little	change	is	occurring.	Your	office	is	starting	to	look	and	feel	like	a
genuine	outer	representation	of	your	inner	professional.	It	may	take	years	to	get	it
right,	but	nothing	will	stop	you.	This	is	too	important.	In	fact,	it	has	become	one	of
the	most	important	things	in	your	life,	right	up	there	with	home	and	family.	See
what	I	mean?”
	
“Yes,”	 he	 says	 eagerly.	 “The	 master	 decorator	 represents	 the	 guru	 and	 the
redecorating	process	represents	the	spiritual	transformation	we	undergo	when	we
truly	begin	to	challenge	our	beliefs	and	seek	higher	knowledge.	What	started	out	as
kind	of	a	gnawing	dissatisfaction	has	grown	into	the	impetus	for	important	change,
and	although	it	might	seem	like	a	bad	thing	at	first,	this	is	how	the	process	of
change	works.	This	is	how	we	develop,	how	we	grow.”
	
“Exactly,”	I	say.	“Nobody	acts	from	contentment.	We	need	problems	to	solve	or
else	we	vegetate.	That	great	office	was	once	something	we	strived	to	get,	then	it
was	achieved	and	enjoyed	in	contentment,	but	then	discontent	sets	in	to	let	us	know
that	it’s	time	to	move	on.”
	
“So,”	says	Kamiel,	“that’s	what	the	teachers	are	talking	about	when	they	discuss	the
dissatisfaction	needed	to	spur	us	on,	right?	It	might	seem	bad	or	uncomfortable,	but
it’s	really	a	good	thing?”
	
“Sounds	right,”	I	say.
	
“And	that’s	the	sort	of	determination	and	focus	that’s	required	in	order	to	awaken
from	delusion?	To	become	truth-realized?”	He	smiles,	excited,	like	he’s	just	now

=== Page 7 ===
getting	the	big	picture.	“So	that’s	what	you	mean	by	purity	of	intent!”
	
I	smile	back.
	
“Fuck	no.	That’s	what	I	mean	by	recipe	for	failure.”
	
His	dismay	is	instantly	apparent.	I’ve	cut	him	off	in	the	first	rush	of	a	new	grokking
and	now	he’s	confused	and	hurt.	I	did	this	intentionally.	I	didn’t	allow	myself	to	be
drawn	into	this	“A	lot	of	teachers	say—”	conversation	just	wanting	to	make	a	point;
I	wanted	counterpoint.	That’s	what	the	dialogue	has	been	up	until	now	because	I
wanted	to	make	a	clear	distinction.	This	is	the	critical	distinction	between	seekers
and	finders.	This	is	where	the	line	is	drawn;	a	line	the	existence	of	which	“a	lot	of
teachers”	don’t	even	suspect.
	
“That’s	the	sort	of	pathetic,	half-assed	approach	that	is	absolutely	certain	to	keep
you	confined	to	your	current	state.	That’s	the	sort	of	approach	that	everyone	takes,
and	that’s	why	they	fail.”
	
He	visibly	and	audibly	gulps.	“Oh.”
	
“The	very	people	and	institutions	that	are	supposedly	dedicated	to	waking	us	up	are
doing	exactly	the	opposite.	They	are	lulling	us	into	a	more	comfortable	sleep.	That’s
what	we	really	want	and	that’s	what	they	really	provide.”
	
He	doesn’t	seem	pleased.	“Oh,	God…	well	then…	then	what	drives	the	process	of
true	awakening?”
	
“Purity	of	intent,	but	what	does	that	really	mean?	Okay,	you’re	back	in	the	office
again,	totally	satisfied	with	everything.	Life	is	great.	Okay?”
	
“Yeah.”
	
“Okay.	 So	 now	 dissatisfaction	 starts	 to	 creep	 in	 on	 you,	 but	 this	 time	 the
dissatisfaction	stems	from	the	fact	that	you	smell	smoke.”
	
“The	building	is	on	fire	now?”
	
“Wake	up	and	smell	the	coffin,	Kamiel.	The	building	has	always	been	on	fire,	you
were	just	repressing	that	knowledge	until	now.	But	now	you’re	aware	of	it	and	it’s
causing	you	some	dissatisfaction.	Quite	a	lot,	in	fact,	and	more	with	every	passing

=== Page 8 ===
moment.	Now	for	the	first	time	you	realize	that	the	flames	are	right	outside	the	door
and	the	temperature	is	rising.	Acrid	black	smoke	is	pouring	in.	The	door	bursts	into
flames.	There	is	no	exit.	Now	you’re	very,	very	dissatisfied	with	your	office.	In	fact,
you’re	starting	to	hate	your	office	quite	profoundly.	See	how	this	dissatisfaction—
this	gnawing	discontentment	on	the,	uh,	feeling	level—is	of	a	more	immediate	and
compelling	nature	then	the	dissatisfaction	brought	on	by	the	decor?”
	
He	nods	mutely.
	
“Sure.	Now	your	dissatisfaction	with	your	office	is	quite	intense.	Searing,	really.	In
fact,	your	dissatisfaction	is	so	intense	that	it	feels	like	you’re	on	fire,	like	you	can’t
stand	to	be	in	your	own	skin,	like	anything	would	be	better	than	more	of	this.	Now
you	have	no	thought	at	all	for	career,	home,	or	family.	Due	to	a	change	in	your
personal	circumstances	they’ve	all	been	reduced	to	complete	irrelevance.	Beliefs
and	concepts	disappear	and	even	death	is	suddenly	small.	You’re	very	focused	now.
You’re	in	the	moment,	very	present.	The	flames	are	feet	away.	Your	dissatisfaction
with	your	office	is	well	beyond	anything	even	a	master	redecorator	could	handle	for
you,	agree?”
	
He	nods.
	
“And	there’s	no	return,	is	there?	No	going	back.	No	do-over.	The	fire	is	here.	It’s	a
fact.	Do	you	see	that?”
	
He	nods	again.
	
“And	you’re	completely	alone	in	all	this.	There’s	no	rescue.	Your	office	is	engulfed
in	flames	and	there’s	no	one	here	to	save	you.	Not	Jesus	or	Buddha	or	the	Pope	or
your	mama.	This	is	your	dissatisfaction.	This	is	your	problem.	This	is	your	agony.
This	is	you	about	to	burn	to	death,	okay?”
	
“Okay.”
	
“Okay.	So	what	do	you	do?”
	
“Huh?”
	
“Your	world	is	burning.	The	whole	office	is	in	flames.	You’re	in	a	hopeless,	no-
escape	situation.	The	pain	has	started	and	will	only	get	worse.	I	think	we	can	safely
say	that	your	dissatisfaction	is	now	quite	pronounced.	What	do	you	do?”

=== Page 9 ===
	
“Christ,	I	don’t	know.	Go	out	the	window?”
	
“Really?”
	
“Hell,	I	don’t	know.	What	else?”
	
“Yeah,	I	guess	so.	You’re	in	this	inferno	of	an	office	while	outside	the	window	is
blue	 sky,	 white	 clouds,	 and	 freedom	 from	 suffering.	 That	 seems	 like	 the	 only
possible	solution	given	your	very	dissatisfying	circumstances.	But—”
	
“But	what?”
	
“Well,	that’s	not	Hollywood	glass	in	those	skyscraper	windows.	You	start	flinging
yourself	against	the	window	but	it	doesn’t	give.	Your	dissatisfaction	is	of	such
intensity	that	you	might	break	bones	and	crack	your	skull	from	hurling	yourself
desperately	against	the	window,	all	to	no	avail.”
	
“Yeah,	then	what?	What	happens?”
	
“Well,	the	obvious	thing	is	that	you	might	simply	perish	in	the	hellish	inferno.	No
law	against	dying.”
	
He	looks	at	me	desperately.
	
“Or,	maybe	you	have	some	object	that	allows	you	to	break	the	window	out.	Or
maybe	the	sheer	intensity	of	your—what	are	we	calling	it,	dissatisfaction?—allows
you	 to	 break	 through	 the	 unbreakable	 window.	 So,	 boom!,	 you	 blow	 out	 the
window.	Now	there’s	nothing	left	in	the	equation	but	you,	the	raging	fire,	and	a
hundred	story	plummet	to	the	sidewalk	below.	Everything	is	suddenly	quite	simple.
Perhaps	for	the	first	time,	your	life	is	perfectly	clear.”
	
“Yeah?	Then?”
	
“Burn	or	jump,	I	guess.”
	
“Burn	or	jump?”
	
“Do	you	see	another	option?”
	

=== Page 10 ===
“Burn	or	jump,”	he	says	flatly.
	
“When	you	become	so	dissatisfied	with	your	office	that	the	hundred	story	plummet
and	the	sidewalk	seem	like	the	better	option,	so	dissatisfied	that	you	actually	hurl
yourself	out	the	window,	then	you	know	the	level	of	dissatisfaction	necessary	to
awaken	from	delusion.”
	
He	is	silent	for	several	moments,	head	bowed,	thoughtful.	“I	guess	dissatisfaction
isn’t	the	right	word.”
	
“Maybe	not,”	I	agree.	“I	call	it	purity	of	intent,	but	that	doesn’t	really	capture	it
either.”
	
“And	that’s	something	every	enlightened	master	went	through?”
	
“You	 say	 it	 like	 there	 are	 countless	 enlightened	 masters	 dotting	 the	 spiritual
landscape,	but	there	are	extremely	few,	and	now	you	know	why.”
	
“Jesus,”	he	mumbles,	seemingly	sincere	in	his	effort	to	truly	appreciate	what	he’s
just	been	told.	“Jesus.”
	
I	deliver	the	moral	of	the	story	in	three	easy	pieces.
	
“The	price.	Of	truth.	Is	everything.”
	
“Jesus,”	he	repeats.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Interview	with	Jed	McKenna
	
The	truth	is	that	enlightenment	is	neither	remote	nor	unattainable.	It	is	closer	than
your	skin	and	more	immediate	than	your	next	breath.	If	we	wonder	why	so	few
seem	able	to	find	that	which	can	never	be	lost,	we	might	recall	the	child	who	was
looking	in	the	light	for	a	coin	he	dropped	in	the	dark	because	“the	light	is	better
over	here.”
	
Jed	McKenna

=== Page 11 ===
	
	
Q:
	What	is	enlightenment?
	
A:	No-self.
	
Q:
	Okay,	what	is	no-self?
	
Abiding	non-dual	awareness.
	
Q:
	Okay,	what	is—?
	
I	can’t	tell	you	what	it	is;	no	one	can.	It’s	not	a	thing,	it’s	not	a	concept,	it’s	not	a
place.	There’s	no	explaining	fire	to	someone	who’s	never	seen	fire;	no	description
can	do	justice	to	the	direct	experience	of	fire.	I	use	terms	like	abiding	non-dual
awareness	and	no-self	and	truth-realization	not	because	they	capture	it,	but	because
they	seem	the	least	misleading.
	
Q:
	Most	people	define	spiritual	enlightenment	very	differently	from	the	way	you
describe	it,	as	if	they	are	talking	about	an	unrelated	state.	How	can	there	be	such
disparity?
	
Enlightenment	is	absolute.	It	doesn’t	come	in	varieties	or	degrees.	It’s	not	open	to
interpretation.	 But	 the	 most	 important	 thing	 is	 that	 it’s	 self-verifiable	 and
completely	available	to	reason.	Anyone	who	wants	to	understand	can	understand.	It
doesn’t	require	interpreters	or	intermediaries.	It’s	just	sitting	there,	right	out	in	the
open,	for	anyone	who	cares	to	look.	No	one	has	to	rely	on	me	or	anyone	else.
Becoming	enlightened	may	be	a	real	ball-buster,	but	enlightenment	theory	is	a
breeze.	The	first	chapter	of	the	book	is	titled	“That	which	cannot	be	simpler.”	That’s
an	exact	statement.	Enlightenment	is	that	which	cannot	be	simplified	further;	cannot
be	further	reduced.
	
Q:
	Which	brings	us	to	the	question	of	who	is	enlightened?	Who	is	writing	the
book?	Who	is	teaching?	It’s	very	difficult	to	reconcile	the	appearance	of	self	with
the	claim	of	no-self.
	
And	yet,	there	it	is.	True	self	is	no-self	and	there’s	just	no	way	to	make	it	sound
reasonable.	I	can’t	express	it	in	a	way	that	anyone	is	going	to	get	it.	I’m	aware	that
there’s	an	apparent	contradiction,	but	it	doesn’t	appear	to	me.	It’s	like	the	gateless

=== Page 12 ===
gate	thing.	It	looks	one	way	from	there	and	another	from	here.	All	I	can	say	is	come
here	and	see	for	yourself.
	
Q:
	That	sounds	like	a	leap	of	faith,	not	logic.
	
It’s	simple	math.	Anyone	can	verify	for	themselves	the	truth	of	non-duality;	the	fact
that	all	is	one.	Any	reasonably	able-minded	person	can	put	it	together	on	their	own.
From	there,	it’s	a	short	step	to	no-self.	Once	you	have	established	in	your	own	mind
the	truth	of	nonduality,	then	countless	fictions,	like	the	idea	of	a	separate	self,	shall
not	long	endure.
	
Q:
	You	say	“reasonably	able-minded	person.”	What’s	really	required	by	way	of
intelligence	for	this	undertaking?
	
Not	much,	as	my	own	success	attests.	It	all	really	comes	back	to	intent.	If	the	intent
is	 in	 place,	 everything	 is	 in	 place.	 If	 the	 intent	 isn’t	 in	 place,	 no	 amount	 of
intelligence	will	make	any	difference.
	
Q:
	So	logic	is	the	tool	of	the	mind	and	desire	is	the	tool	of	the	heart?
	
Sure.	Good.	Logic—mind—is	the	sword	and	intent—heart—is	the	will	to	use	it.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	It’s	often	said	that	for	a	book	to	do	well	the	author	must	actively	promote	it
through	appearances	and	media	exposure.	Why	won’t	you	do	book	signings	or	radio
interviews	or	any	of	that?
	
I	could	answer	that	a	lot	of	different	ways.	I	could	say	that	the	nature	of	the	book
doesn’t	lend	itself	to	that	sort	of	exposure,	which	is	true.	I	could	say	that	I’m	not
disposed	to	undergo	that	sort	of	personal	exposure,	which	is	also	true.	But	the	larger
truth	is	that	the	book	will	succeed	or	fail	on	things	other	than	marketing	and	PR.	My
job	 was	 to	 competently	 write	 the	 book.	 The	 publisher’s	 job	 is	 to	 competently
produce	the	book	and	make	it	available.	How	the	book	fares	in	the	marketplace	is
none	of	our	concern.
	
Q:
	Do	you	care	if	it	succeeds	or	fails?
	
I’d	be	amused	if	it	succeeds.	I’d	be	relieved	if	it	fails.	I	had	an	urge	to	express
certain	things	and	now	I	have	and	the	urge	is	gone.	That’s	really	the	whole	story.

=== Page 13 ===
	
Q:
	But	you’re	doing	another	book.
	
Yeah,	 there’s	 more	 material,	 more	 fun	 stuff,	 but	 the	 first	 book	 is	 a	 complete
expression.	There	are	other	things	to	look	at	and	other	ways	of	looking.	We	think	of
enlightenment	 as	 the	 pinnacle,	 as	 the	 best	 possible	 thing,	 but	 it’s	 not.	 There’s
something	 far	 better	 and	 it’s	 the	 thing	 everyone	 who	 is	 interested	 in	 spiritual
enlightenment	is	really	after.	There’s	a	lot	to	be	said	on	that	subject	if	we	want	to
achieve	a	complete	expression	and	provide	a	valuable	service	to	the	reader.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	We’ve	received	many	questions	about	you	personally.	People	want	to	know
about	your	history,	your	relationships,	your	finances,	everything.	For	instance,	do
you	have	friends?	Do	you	socialize	beyond	the	student/teacher	relationship?
	
This	whole	thing	really	has	nothing	to	do	with	me	personally	and	it	would	be
counter-productive	to	shift	the	focus	onto	me.	A	mind	that	is	turned	outward	is
turned	away	from	the	serious	business	of	awakening.	People	who	aren’t	serious
about	this	stuff	are	always	looking	for	something	to	latch	onto,	some	external	thing
to	focus	on,	but	all	they	really	want	is	to	maintain	an	outward	focus.	There	are
plenty	of	people	and	organizations	that	exist	to	perform	that	very	function.
	
Q:
	It’s	easy	to	understand	why	people	would	be	curious.
	
The	seller/buyer	dynamic	is	the	principal	on	which	the	entire	spiritual	marketplace
operates,	 but	 anyone	 who	 wants	 to	 make	 real	 progress	 must	 leave	 all	 that
codependent,	mass-delusion	nonsense	behind.	This	isn’t	a	popularity	contest	or	a
democratic	 process.	 The	 major	 religions	 have	 countless	 millions	 of	 intelligent,
dedicated	adherents,	but	viewed	objectively,	they	are	nothing	more	than	childish
fairy	tales	unworthy	of	serious	consideration.	If	you	can’t	see	that,	if	you	can’t	get
that	far,	if	you	can’t	break	free	of	that	rancid	consumer	mindset,	then	that’s	where
you	should	be	shining	the	light	of	intellect,	not	on	some	guy	who	wrote	some	book.
	
I’m	not	relevant	to	anyone’s	search.	I’m	just	a	finger	pointing	at	the	moon.	There’s
nothing	to	be	learned	from	the	finger.	Everybody’s	eager	to	find	a	distraction	from
the	real	work	of	waking	up,	but	that’s	all	it	is,	a	distraction.	I’m	a	private	person	and
I	have	no	interest	in	participating	in	anyone’s	evasive	maneuvers.
	
Q:
	You	say	you’ve	stopped	teaching.	How	did	you	come	to	that	decision?

=== Page 14 ===
	
There	was	no	decision	involved,	just	an	observation.	It’s	easier	to	understand	if	we
state	it	more	accurately.	It’s	not	that	I	stopped	teaching;	it’s	that	I	reached	the	end	of
the	learning	process	necessary	to	bring	the	book	into	being.	Everything,	it	turns	out,
was	about	the	book.	The	many	hundreds	of	hours	I’ve	spent	in	dialog	with	seekers
at	all	levels	of	comprehension	was	a	part	of	the	book’s	process	of	becoming.	The
completion	of	the	book	marked	the	conclusion	of	the	teaching	thing.
	
Q:
	Because,	as	you’ve	said,	everything	you	have	to	say	is	in	the	book?
	
Because	everything	was	always	about	the	book.	Not	in	the	sense	that	I	planned	it
that	way,	but	in	the	sense	that	that’s	the	way	it	is.	You	could	look	at	in	a	very	linear
fashion	and	say	that	I	started	writing	the	book	on	such-and-such	a	date	and	finished
the	book	on	such-and-such	a	date,	but	that’s	a	very	narrow	and	incomplete	view.
That	 would	 be	 a	 very	 narrow	 and	 incomplete	 way	 of	 looking	 at	 any	 creative
journey.	Once	you	remove	the	blinders	of	time	and	space	and	see	the	flow	of	things
passing	into	and	out	of	being,	you	get	a	much	broader	and	less	linear	sense	of	the
flow	of	things.
	
Q:
	What	you’ve	called	an	oceanic	view.
	
Right.	You	can’t	really	isolate	an	oceanic	event,	a	wave,	for	instance.	Where	in
space	and	time	did	it	begin?	Where	in	space	and	time	does	it	end?	Who	can	say?	It’s
just	one	part	of	something	much	larger.	Why	try	to	chop	it	into	little	pieces?
	
Q:
	For	the	purposes	of	comprehension.
	
For	 the	 comfortable	 illusion	 of	 comprehension,	 sure.	 And	 that’s	 great,	 nothing
wrong	with	it	until	it’s	time	to	get	serious	and	dispense	with	comfortable	illusions.
But,	to	bring	it	back	to	the	teaching	thing,	I	didn’t	decide	or	choose	to	be	done	with
it,	I	simply	observed	that	it	was	over.	There	it	goes,	and	with	it,	frankly,	goes	my
interest	in	spiritual	matters.
	
Q:
	And	anyone	who	would	like	to	have	you	for	a	teacher?
	
Seeking	a	teacher	is	just	ego	seeking	a	reprieve;	a	stay	of	execution.	Giving	oneself
over	to	a	teacher	or	a	teaching	or	the	Beloved	Guru	or	whatever	is	all	about	staying
asleep,	not	waking	up.	The	first	rule	in	this	business	is	that	you	are	on	your	own.
Ego	clings	to	a	teacher	like	a	drowning	man	clings	to	a	log.	The	teacher	is	beloved

=== Page 15 ===
the	way	the	log	is	beloved.	The	teaching	is	sacred	the	way	the	log	is	sacred.	The	log
is	the	savior,	saving	us	from	sinking	into	the	cold	black	depths.
	
Q:
	But	what	of	the	students	who	achieved	their	awakening	under	you?
	
I	was	just	there	for	them.	A	midwife	can	hardly	take	credit	for	the	child.	A	signpost
can	hardly	take	credit	for	someone’s	successful	journey.
	
Q:
	Will	you	miss	teaching?	Do	you	think	you	might	return	to	it?
	
I	won’t	miss	it	and	I	don’t	think	I	could	return	to	it	if	I	wanted	to.	The	teacher	role	is
a	false	persona	just	like	any	other;	a	costume.	It’s	not	the	“real”	me	and	I	doubt	I
could	muster	the	energy	needed	to	animate	the	role	anymore.	It	was	a	garment	I
wore	and	have	now	cast	off.	It	served	its	purpose.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	Rather	than	aiding	people	in	their	quest	for	spiritual	enlightenment,	it	seems	like
you	sometimes	encourage	them	to	abandon	it.	You	seem	to	advise	people	to	see	it
for	what	it	really	is,	not	necessarily	so	they	can	attain	it,	but	so	they	can	stop	trying.
Does	that	seem	like	a	fair	assessment?
	
Definitely.	What	it	really	is	is	so	far	removed	from	what	many	seekers	are	seeking
that	it’s	only	humane	to	try	to	wave	them	off.	The	overwhelming	majority	of	those
who	read	this	will	be	best	served	in	this	way.	Only	a	very	tiny	percentage	will	be
what	I	think	of	as	serious	people;	people	who	are	actually	in	the	general	proximity
of	the	journey	of	awakening.	As	to	the	rest,	unfulfilled	seeking	is	its	own	thing—its
own	 life	 theme—and	 that’s	 what	 most	 people	 are	 really	 doing.	 For	 them,	 the
seeking	fills	a	very	real	need	and	that’s	the	point;	the	seeking,	not	the	finding.
	
Q:
	But	they	are	not	aware	that	they	are	seeking	for	the	experience	of	seeking,	and
not	for	the	actual	attainment	of	that	which	is	sought?
	
Sure,	necessarily	so.	And	here	I	should	remind	you	that	in	the	context	of	being	a
human	being	on	planet	earth,	seeking	truth	makes	sense	and	finding	it	doesn’t.
	
Q:
	You’ve	actually	said	that	enlightenment	is	a	bit	silly.
	
Yeah,	the	whole	business	is	a	little	goofy.
	

=== Page 16 ===
Q:
	It’s	strange	to	hear	an	enlightened	master	refer	to	spiritual	enlightenment	as
“goofy.”
	
I	don’t	know.	It’s	all	goofy.	What’s	not	goofy?	The	First	Noble	Truth	isn’t	“Life	is
suffering,”	it’s	“Life	is	goofy.”	The	goofiest	people	are	the	ones	who	take	it	the
most	seriously,	and	no	one	takes	it	more	seriously	than	someone	who	wants	to
awaken	from	it.
	
Q:
	So,	spiritual	seekers	are	the	goofiest	people?
	
Well,	the	world	is	full	of	strangely	serious	people.
	
Q:
	Are	you	trying	to	avoid	saying	that	spiritual	seekers	are	the	goofiest	people?
	
No,	I’m	not	saying	that	because	I	don’t	think	spiritual	seekers	in	general	are	all	that
serious.	Someone	who	is	truly	in	the	process	of	awakening	would	be	the	most
serious	imaginable	person	in	the	world,	but	that	doesn’t	apply	to	many	people.
	
Q:
	Enlightenment	is	usually	touted	as	the	greatest	of	all	achievements,	as	self-
perfection,	as	the	highest	aim	of	humanity,	the	ultimate	goal	of	every	search,	but
you	make	it	seem	almost	pointless	at	times.
	
Well,	I	wouldn’t	want	to	give	the	impression	that	it’s	almost	pointless.	It’s	perfectly
pointless.	Awakening	to	your	true	nature	is	like	dying;	it’s	a	certainty,	inevitable.
You’re	going	to	get	there	no	matter	what	you	do,	so	why	rush?	Enjoy	your	life,	it’s
free.	Cosmic	Consciousness	and	Altered	States	and	Universal	Mind	are	the	names
of	rides	in	this	vast	and	fascinating	dualistic	amusement	park.	So	are	Poverty	and
Disease	and	Despair.	Enlightenment,	though,	is	not	another	ride.	Enlightenment
means	leaving	the	park	altogether,	but	why	leave	the	park?	In	the	park	you	can	be	a
saint	or	a	yogi	or	a	billionaire	or	a	world	leader	or	a	warlord.	Be	good,	be	evil.
Happiness,	misery,	bliss,	agony,	victory,	defeat,	it’s	all	here.	What’s	the	big	rush?
When	the	time	comes	to	leave	the	park,	you’ll	know	and	you’ll	go,	but	there’s
certainly	nothing	to	be	gained	by	it.
	
Q:
	So	you	encourage	seekers	to	abandon	the	search.
	
I’m	not	trying	to	encourage	or	discourage,	I’m	just	trying	to	express	something	that
is	 difficult	 to	 express	 and	 about	 which	 virtually	 everyone	 with	 an	 interest	 is
egregiously	misinformed.
	

=== Page 17 ===
Q:
	As	you	say	in	the	book:
	
“
In	most	cases,	the	enlightenment	being	bought	and	sold	is	not	enlightenment	at	all,
but	a	state	of	consciousness	so	crazy-ass	wonderful	that	you’d	have	to	be	an	idiot
not	to	want	it.	So	insidiously	wonderful,	in	fact,	that	its	radiance	has	blinded	untold
millions	of	seekers	to	the	fact	that	it	doesn’t	exist.”
	
Q:
	Does	this	seem	to	capture	it?
	
Essentially.	The	enlightenment	that	seems	desirable	isn’t	enlightenment,	and	that
aspect	of	us	which	is	able	to	desire	enlightenment	is	unable	to	achieve	it	won’t
survive	its	onset.	Day	destroys	night.
	
Q:
	So	seeking	is	doomed	to	failure?
	
That’s	a	matter	of	context.	I	look	at	spiritual	seekers	and	they	seem,	on	the	whole,
pretty	content.	Maybe	that’s	because	what	they’re	really	seeking	is	contentment.
Seeking	 enlightenment	 is	 an	 inherent	 paradox,	 but	 who’s	 really	 seeking
enlightenment?	In	the	introduction	to	her	book	Halfway	Up	the	Mountain:	The
Error	of	Premature	Claims	to	Enlightenment,	Mariana	Caplan	states:
	
The	reality	of	the	present	condition	of	contemporary	spirituality	in	the	West	is	one
of	grave	distortion,	confusion,	fraud,	and	a	fundamental	lack	of	education.
	
In	my	opinion	there’s	no	real	reason	to	discriminate.	The	East	is	no	better	off	in	this
regard	and	perhaps	much	worse.	She	also	says:
	
The	 subject	 of	 enlightenment	 itself	 is	 one	 of	 the	 biggest	 arenas	 of	 naiveté,
ignorance,	self-deceit,	and	confusion	in	contemporary	spirituality.	A	close	second	to
enlightenment	is	the	category	of	“mystical”	or	“spiritual”	experiences.
	
I	might	turn	it	around	and	say	that	contemporary	spirituality	is	one	of	the	biggest
arenas	 of	 naiveté,	 ignorance,	 self-deceit,	 and	 confusion	 in	 the	 quest	 for
enlightenment,	but	you	get	the	idea.
	
Q:
	It	seems	like	many	spiritual	teachers	adopt	the	names,	clothing	or	titles	of	their
spiritual	heritage,	but	you	steer	clear	of	those	trappings.
	
Well,	I	don’t	have	any	particular	teaching	or	lineage,	and	no	guru	ever	renamed	me
because	I	never	had	a	guru.	In	any	event,	I	wouldn’t	want	to	give	anyone	the

=== Page 18 ===
impression	that	truth	was	proprietary	or	the	exclusive	domain	of	some	foreign	or
ancient	culture.	Truth	is	one’s	personal	domain,	any	time,	any	place.	If	I	were	to
wear	robes	or	have	a	Hindu	name	or	a	Japanese	title	that	would	only	serve	to
mislead	those	who	ask	me	to	point	the	way.	I	don’t	point	East	or	West;	I	point	right
back	at	the	seeker.
	
Q:
	So	you	don’t	think	a	student	needs	a	guru?	That	seems	to	be	matter	of	endless
debate.
	
Whatever	it	is	they’re	seeking	in	Guru-based	traditions	might	require	a	guru,	I	have
no	idea.	I’m	defining	spiritual	enlightenment	as	truth-realization	and	that	doesn’t
require	anything	but	purity	of	intent.
	
Q:
	Purity	of	intent	meaning	like	you	describe	in	the	book	when	you	talk	about	your
own	journey?
	
I	had	a	student	named	Alexander.	At	one	point	in	his	awakening	he	decided	that	he
needed	access	to	a	library	in	Chicago.	I	never	knew	why,	but	he	was	sure	that	the
next	thing	he	needed	could	only	be	found	there.	So	he	started	hitchhiking	from	Los
Angeles	with	no	hesitation.	He	had	no	money	and	he	looked	unkempt	and	scary	so
he	had	trouble	getting	rides	and	had	to	do	a	lot	of	walking.	He	walked	right	through
his	soles	so	he	had	to	insert	folded	newspaper	inside	his	shoes	several	times	a	day.	It
was	winter,	so	he	had	to	do	odd	jobs	along	the	way	for	a	used	jacket,	boots,	food;
quite	an	ordeal.	Three	weeks	later	he	makes	it	to	Chicago.	He	sleeps	in	a	doorway,
eats	whatever	he	can	find.	He	carries	books	with	him	that	he	reads	whenever	the
demands	of	surviving	allow.
	
Q:
	That	sounds	like	a	grueling	hardship.
	
That’s	my	point.	If	you	were	to	use	the	word	hardship	to	Alexander	as	he	sat
exhausted,	cold	and	hungry	in	that	doorway,	he’d	have	just	stared	at	you	as	if	you
were	a	yapping	dog.	I’ll	also	point	out	that	six	months	earlier	Alexander	was	a	very
normal	guy	with	a	wife,	kids,	a	house	and	a	job.
	
There	is	no	hardship,	there’s	only	the	next	thing,	the	next	step,	the	next	battle.	The
point	is	always	to	get	the	next	door	unlocked.	The	bible	says	to	pluck	out	your	eye
if	it	offends	you.	If	Alexander’s	eye	were	preventing	him	from	opening	the	next
door,	it	wouldn’t	occur	to	him	not	to	remove	it.	That’s	the	fuel	that	drives	this
journey.	It’s	not	in	scriptures	or	temples.	It’s	no	one’s	to	give	or	withhold.	That’s
what	I	mean	by	purity	of	intent.

=== Page 19 ===
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	You	describe	a	process	of	awakening	that	generally	takes	two	years,	plus	another
ten	to	integrate,	yet	many	spiritual	teachers	describe	enlightenment	as	the	result	of
an	instantaneous	transformative	event.
	
I	would	guess	that	they’ve	undergone	the	kind	of	experience	that	Bucke	talks	about
in	the	book	Cosmic	Consciousness;	some	sort	of	mystical	insight	into	the	heart	of
creation	or	something	equally	transcendent	and	transformative.	Great	stuff.	I’ve	had
mystical	experiences	myself	and	I	wouldn’t	even	try	to	express	the	wonder	of	them.
But	the	idea	that	someone	can	awaken	to	no-self	in	a	flash	is	simply	absurd.	Such
people	are	talking	about	something	wonderful,	but	it’s	not	truth-realization.	It’s	not
abiding	non-dual	awareness.
	
Q:
	There’s	a	lot	of	talk	among	spiritual	teachers	suggesting	that	we’re	currently
undergoing	a	massive	shift	in	consciousness	and	that	mankind	is	entering	a	new	age
of	spiritual	upliftment.	Do	you	see	such	a	shift	taking	place?
	
No.	People	who	talk	about	an	enlightened	humanity	are	talking	about	a	world	where
the	lamb	lies	down	with	the	lion	and	everyone	is	happy	and	healthy	and	whole.	In
short,	a	world	without	conflict,	without	drama.	But	that	would	be	very	silly	since
the	whole	point	of	duality	is	division.	The	whole	point	of	opposites	is	opposition.
This	is	a	drama,	not	a	still-life,	and	no	awakened	being	would	ever	suggest	that
everything	wasn’t	just	perfect	the	way	it	is.
	
To	 return	 to	 the	 amusement	 park	 analogy,	 imagine	 a	 group	 of	 self-proclaimed
visionaries	who	want	to	smooth	out	all	the	roller	coasters	so	there	were	no	scary
plummets	or	loops,	just	long,	slow,	safe	circles.	Great,	but	what’s	the	point?
	
Anyone	who	says	there’s	a	shift	coming	and	those	who	follow	their	teaching	will
ride	the	wave	are	in	the	sales	business,	more	accurately,	they’re	in	the	business	of
selling	something	that’s	not	theirs	to	sell.	They	get	asked	why	no	one	who	buys	ever
receives	the	product,	and	this	is	a	stock	answer;	we’ll	all	make	the	big	shift	together.
That’s	how	they	keep	the	dogs	wagging	their	tails.
	
Q:
	From	the	book	it	seems	like	you	never	engaged	in	any	of	the	normal	spiritual
activities.	You’re	not	a	meditator,	you	never	used	a	koan,	never	had	a	mantra,	never
had	a	guru	or	teacher.	This	challenges	a	lot	of	people’s	closely	held	beliefs	about
how	spiritual	realization	is	attained.

=== Page 20 ===
	
I	never	thought	of	waking	up	as	a	spiritual	pursuit,	I	just	wanted	to	get	to	the	truth.
Looking	back,	I	can	see	where	I	might	have	used	the	word	infinity	in	a	koan-like
manner;	 kind	 of	 a	 Western	 version	 of	 mu.	 Infinity	 is	 beautiful;	 it	 destroys
everything	it	touches.	It	annihilates	all	concepts,	all	beliefs,	all	sense	of	self.	No
teacher,	teaching,	book	or	practice	could	ever	be	as	effective	as	simply	allowing	the
thought	of	infinity	to	slowly	devour	you.
	
Q:
	Even	more	so	than	Spiritual	Autolysis?
	
Spiritual	Autolysis	invariably	leads	to	infinity.	I	mean,	where	else?
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
The	Deficiency	of	Recorded	Accounts
	
This	is	the	personal	account	of	a	two-year	journey	during	which	I	experienced	the
falling	away	of	everything	I	can	call	a	self.	It	was	a	journey	through	an	unknown
passageway	that	led	to	a	life	so	new	and	different	that,	despite	forty	years	of	varied
contemplative	experiences,	I	never	suspected	its	existence.	Because	it	was	beyond
my	expectations,	the	experience	of	no-self	remained	incomprehensible	in	terms	of
any	frame	of	reference	known	to	me,	and	though	I	searched	the	libraries	and
bookstores	I	did	not	find	there	an	explanation	or	an	account	of	a	similar	journey
which,	at	the	time,	would	have	been	clarifying	and	most	helpful.	Owing	then	to	the
deficiency	of	recorded	accounts,	I	have	written	these	pages	trusting	that	they	may
be	of	use	to	those	who	share	the	destiny	of	making	this	journey	beyond	the	self.
	
Bernadette	Roberts,	Introduction
The	Experience	of	No-self:	A	Contemplative	Journey
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Dr.	Pillay	Interview
	
These	 four	 questions	 came	 from	 Dr.	 Kriben	 Pillay,	 editor	 and	 founder	 of	 The
Noumenon	Journal.

=== Page 21 ===
	
	
Q:
	You’ve	referred	to	enlightenment	a	few	times	as	‘abiding	non-dual	awareness’.
Is	it	possible	to	say	more	about	what	this	is?
	
The	 term	 Non-Dual	 Awareness	 is	 an	 attempt	 to	 capture	 the	 living	 reality	 of
otherlessness	in	words.	This	term—Non-Dual	Awareness—seems	like	a	reasonable
portrayal	of	the	state	from	within	the	state.	The	word	Abiding	distinguishes	it	from
any	 of	 the	 fleeting	 states	 commonly	 mistaken	 for,	 or	 sold	 as,	 Spiritual
Enlightenment.
	
Actually,	 I	 think	 the	 worst	 term	 for	 Spiritual	 Enlightenment	 is	 Spiritual
Enlightenment.	As	I	said	in	the	book,	I	didn’t	realize	until	several	years	after	my
awakening	that	what	I	had	achieved/become	was	what	people	meant	when	they	said
Spiritual	Enlightenment;	at	least,	what	those	people	meant	who	used	the	term	to
mean	 the	 absolute	 state	 rather	 than	 a	 higher-level	 dreamstate	 like	 Unity
Consciousness.	 The	 experience	 of	 Unity	 Conscious	 certainly	 feels	 more	 like
something	you’d	want	to	call	Spiritual	Enlightenment,	but	it’s	not	lasting,	so	what	is
it?	A	sweet	dream.	The	most	wonderful	thing	we	can	experience,	I’d	agree,	but	not
a	permanent	awakening	from	delusion.
	
The	 best	 term	 might	 be	 Truth-Realization.	 The	 term	 Spiritual	 Enlightenment
perpetuates	 the	 mist-enshrouded,	 mountain-top	 mystique,	 whereas	 Truth-
Realization	sounds	natural,	reasonable,	and	within	reach.	Spiritual	Enlightenment	is
for	the	ultra-elite,	but	truth	is	everyone’s	business.
	
Q:
	 How	 would	 Spiritual	 Autolysis	 work	 if	 someone	 (still	 unenlightened)	 went
around	saying	that	enlightenment	is	‘abiding	non-dual	awareness’?
	
Exactly,	that’s	the	question.	Calling	it	Abiding	Non-Dual	Awareness	might	be	an
adequate	description	from	within,	but	is	it	useful	from	without?	Is	it	useful	for	the
seeker	to	know	and	call	it	by	that	name?	And	the	answer	is,	I	think,	not	very.
	
In	the	book,	I	made	an	effort	to	convey	the	daily	reality,	even	banality,	of	my
experience.	I	wanted	to	hold	myself	up	as	an	awakened	being	and	say	“Look,	this	is
it.	This	is	what	it’s	really	like.”	So	the	term	Abiding	Non-Dual	Awareness	serves
that	purpose,	but	it’s	probably	not	the	most	illuminating	term	for	the	seeker.
	
For	the	purposes	of	trying	to	achieve	this	state,	I	think	the	terms	No-Self,	Truth-
Realization,	and	Non-Duality	are	of	more	practical	value.

=== Page 22 ===
	
Q:
	 You	 mention	 that	 you	 enjoy	 books	 written	 by	 those	 who	 have	 attained
enlightenment	 and	 who	 write	 well	 about	 what	 it’s	 like.	 Can	 you	 name	 a	 few
authors?
	
I’m	going	to	sidestep	this	question	in	order	to	provide	a	more	pertinent	answer.	The
goal	of	the	genuine	seeker	is	always	to	take	the	next	step,	to	open	the	next	door.
Waking	up	is	not	a	scholastic	pursuit	or	a	conceptual	challenge.	The	ability	to	open
the	next	door	is	the	only	thing	that	matters,	and	the	key	can	come	in	any	package;	a
book,	a	stubbed	toe,	an	advertising	jingle,	a	leaf	of	grass.	If	your	intent	is	in	place,
then	the	universe	will	act	as	your	librarian	and	you’ll	always	have	you	what	you
need	when	you	need	it.
	
Q:
	Some	teachers	like	U.G.	Krishnamurti	posit	that	the	individual	can	do	nothing
about	becoming	enlightened	simply	because	it	means	the	end	of	the	individual	self-
sense.	You	are	emphatic	that	it	can	happen	through	conscious	intention,	and	that	it
should	take	no	longer	than	two	years	after	the	first	step	has	happened.	How	would
you	view	U.G.’s	view,	(and	Balsekar’s,	whom	you	quote),	because	it	brings	up	the
old	debate	of	destiny	and	free	will	in	the	pursuit	of	enlightenment?
	
Firstly,	the	debate	of	destiny	and	free	will	is	a	non-issue;	a	dry	hole.	It	is	based	on
false	assumptions	and	false	knowledge.	Through	clear-seeing,	rather	than	belief,
any	such	question	can	be	transcended/destroyed,	and	the	whole	matter	left	behind.
It’s	just	another	gate	to	get	stuck	behind	for	awhile	and	eventually	pass	beyond
when	you	discover	it	was	never	really	there.	Obviously,	no	answer	is	possible.	The
trick	is	in	seeing	that	the	question	too	is	not	possible.
	
Secondly,	yes,	I’m	emphatic.	Not	only	can	it	happen	through	conscious	intention,	it
can	only	happen	through	conscious	intention.
	
To	say	that	the	individual	can	do	nothing	to	break	free	of	dualistic	perception
because	it	results	in	non-dualistic	perception	is	nonsensical,	like	saying	a	living
being	can’t	step	off	a	cliff	because	it	results	in	death,	or	that	a	dreamer	can’t	wake
up	because	he’s	dreaming.
	
However,	if	U.G.	Krishnamurti	and	others	were	saying	that	self	cannot	achieve	no-
self,	then	that’s	perfectly	correct.	The	end	of	the	one	marks	the	beginning	of	the
other.	No	one	can	have	their	cake	and	eat	it	too,	despite	what	so	many	egotists	and
profiteers	would	have	us	believe.
	

=== Page 23 ===
Is	it	a	paradox?	Yes.	Can	it	be	explained	so	people	will	understand?	No.	Can	people
come	see	for	themselves	and	understand	it	directly?	Yes.	How?	Claw,	scratch,	bite,
and	burn.	Burn	everything.
	
Think	for	yourself	and	figure	out	what’s	true.	You	figure	out	what’s	true	through	a
process	of	elimination,	by	figuring	out	what’s	not	true.	That’s	the	master	key;
follow	the	truth.	Ultimately,	that’s	my	only	advice.	The	clock	is	ticking	and	you’re
completely	on	your	own.	Forget	concepts,	forget	philosophy,	forget	spirituality,
forget	what	anyone	else	says,	don’t	try	to	dictate	terms.	Just	think	for	yourself	and
figure	out	what’s	true.
	
You	can	do	it.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Impersonating	Jed	McKenna
	
But	with	the	clear	certitude	of	the	self’s	disappearance,	there	automatically	arose
the	question	of	what	had	fallen	away—what	was	the	self?	What,	exactly	had	it
been?	Then	too,	there	was	the	all-important	question:	what	remained	in	its	absence?
	
Bernadette	Roberts
	
	
No	man	is	a	prophet	in	his	own	country.
	That	line	keeps	running	through	my
mind	as	I	sit	over	lunch	with	my	sister	who	I	haven’t	seen	in	several	years.	These
days	I’m	the	enlightened	guy,	but	to	her	I’m	just	the	bratty	kid	who	couldn’t	make
eye	contact	when	she	wore	a	bikini.
	
It’s	summer	‘01	and	we’re	having	lunch	in	lower	Manhattan.	She	read	a	preview
copy	of	Damnedest	and	has	had	a	few	months	to	digest	it.	It	was	very	nice	of	her	to
read	it	because	it’s	really	not	her	kind	of	thing.	She’s	a	good	citizen;	a	successful
executive,	 wife,	 mother,	 Republican,	 tennis	 nut,	 Christian-ish,	 and	 all-round
productive	member	of	society.	(She	once	told	me	she	was	raising	her	children	to	be
productive	members	of	society	and	I	winced	so	hard	I	almost	chipped	a	tooth.)
She’s	a	wonderful	person,	but	not	a	member	of	the	demographic	the	book	speaks	to.
	

=== Page 24 ===
There’s	a	plate	of	chilled	pasta	in	front	of	me	and	a	salad	in	front	of	her.	We’re	both
drinking	iced	tea.	She’s	runs	the	creative	side	of	a	medium-sized	ad	agency	and,	I
have	no	doubt,	she’s	very	good	at	it.	She’s	taking	time	out	of	her	very	hectic
schedule	to	have	lunch	with	me.	After	this,	I’m	going	to	the	park	to	lay	in	the	grass
and	watch	people	play	with	their	dogs.
	
Visiting	your	sister	and	having	lunch	shouldn’t	be	a	confusing	ordeal,	but	it	is.	Is
she	 really	 my	 sister?	 What	 does	 that	 mean?	 We	 share	 some	 history	 and
acquaintances,	such	as	childhood	and	parents.	Are	my	parents	really	my	parents?
Genetically	they	are	related	to	my	body,	but	the	person	who	lived	my	childhood	is
no	longer	here.	The	past	I	share	with	this	person	is	about	as	real	and	important	to
me	as	if	I’d	read	it	in	a	brochure.
	
The	problem	is	that	these	people,	my	family,	are	all	related	to	my	shell,	and	I’m	not.
They’re	looking	at	the	outer	Jed	McKenna	and	assuming	an	inner	Jed	McKenna.
I’m	 inside	 Jed	 McKenna	 looking	 out	 and	 I	 can’t	 really	 remember	 what	 he’s
supposed	to	do	or	say.	It’s	all	fakery.	I’m	an	actor	playing	a	role	for	which	I	feel	no
connection	 and	 have	 no	 motivation.	 There	 cannot	 be	 anything	 genuine	 in	 my
dealings	with	people	who	are	dealing	with	my	outer	garment.	(The	whole	thing	is
further	entangled	by	the	fact	that	there’s	no	“I”	inhabiting	my	shell,	just	a	fading
echo,	but	let’s	not	go	down	that	road	just	now.)
	
Actually,	it’s	not	really	confusing.	I	possess	not	the	least	shred	of	doubt	about	who
and	what	I	am.	The	tricky	thing	is	that	who	and	what	I	am	is	not	related	to	this
pretty,	professional,	salad-eating	woman	across	from	me.	By	coming	to	this	lunch	I
have	inserted	myself	into	a	situation	where	I	do	not	belong.	I	am	an	imposter.	I	have
some	residual	fondness	for	my	sister	and	if	she	died	I’d	be	saddened	to	think	that
she	was	no	longer	in	the	world,	but	the	simple	fact	is	that	our	former	relationship	no
longer	exists.
	
Okay,	so	why	am	I	telling	you	this?
	
Because	that’s	what	I	do.	I	try	to	hold	this	enlightenment	thing	up	for	display	and
this	seems	like	an	interesting	aspect	of	the	whole	deal.	How	do	you	relate	to	the
people	who	were	most	important	to	you	before	awakening	from	the	dream	of	the
segregated	self?
	
She	asks	why	I’m	in	town.
	

=== Page 25 ===
“My	astrologers	told	me	it	was	a	good	time	to	get	away	and	not	try	to	accomplish
anything.	They	said	that	ketu	and	rahu	wouldn’t	be	letting	me	get	anything	done	for
awhile	anyway—”
	
I	look	up	and	see	that	she	has	stopped	chewing	in	mid-mouthful	and	is	staring	at	me
incredulously.
	
“What?”
	
“My	astrologers—”
	
“You’re	not	serious.	You	have	astrologers?”
	
Oh	yeah,	I	guess	that	sounds	weird.	I	was	vaguely	aware	that	I	was	trying	to	be
funny	by	starting	a	sentence	with	“My	astrologers	told	me—”	but	what’s	a	little
amusing	to	me	is	other-worldly	to	her.	Might	as	well	have	fun	with	it.
	
“I	have	dozens	of	astrologers.	I	can’t	swing	a	dead	cat	without	hitting	someone
who’s	doing	my	chart	or	explaining	how	my	future	will	unfold;	advising	me	on
pretty	much	everything.”
	
Her	expression	doesn’t	change.	“You	have	astrologers?”
	
“Lots.	Gotta	beat	‘em	off	with	a	stick.”
	
“And	they	tell	you…	they	tell	you	what	the	future	holds?	What	you	should	do?
When	you	should	do	it?	What	you	should	avoid?	Is	that	what	we’re	talking	about?”
	
“I	suppose.”
	
She	resumes	chewing	but	the	wide-eyed	gaze	remains.	There’s	a	chasm	in	this
conversation	across	which	there’s	no	point	trying	to	communicate.	She	knows	I’m
into	some	serious	weirdness,	but	not	how	much	or	what	kind.	I	don’t	really	have
astrologers,	of	course,	but	in	those	days	it	did	seem	like	I	was	surrounded	by
students	of	Eastern	and	Western	astrology	who	were	always	very	eager	to	share
their	readings.
	
“What	do	you	do	with	all	that	information?”
	

=== Page 26 ===
“Me?	Nothing.	I	mean,	I	don’t	ask	for	it.	It’s	not	like	I	wake	up	and	summon	the
court	astrologers	to	plan	my	day.”
	
“It	sounds	like	you	do.”
	
“I	was	speaking	lightly.”
	
I’m	trying	to	skip	playfully	along	the	surface	of	this	conversation.	I	don’t	want	to
sink	down	into	the	kind	of	answer	I’d	give	a	serious	student.	The	truth	is	that	I	don’t
possess	any	mechanism	that	would	allow	me	to	be	curious	or	concerned	about	the
future,	but	saying	that	doesn’t	make	for	breezy	conversation.
	
“Jesus,”	she	says,	shaking	her	head.	“My	little	brother	has	his	own	astrologers.”
	
“Well,	they’re	not	really	mine.	They’re	just	in	attendance,	so	to	speak.”
	
I’m	used	to	conversing	with	people	who	aren’t	awake	and	aren’t	happy	about	it.
Everything	else	is	chit-chat;	talking	for	the	sake	of	talking,	reinforcing	the	illusion
of	self.	I’m	not	against	it,	I	just	don’t	care	to	participate	in	it.
	
“So,	you	obviously	have	a	great	deal	of	influence	over	your	students,”	she	says	as
she	sips	her	iced	tea.	I	mull	her	statement	over	and	decide	that	I	don’t	have	a
response.	I	take	another	bite	of	pasta,	wishing	I’d	ordered	something	with	meat.
	
“I	mean,”	she	says,	“they	obviously	hold	you	in	very	high	regard.	That’s	quite	a
responsibility.”
	
She	thinks,	quite	understandably,	that	she’s	my	big	sister	and	we’re	having	a	nice
little	catch-up	lunch.	She’s	been	thrown	a	curve	with	this	little-brother/spiritual-
master	thing	and	she’s	trying	to	handle	it.	Does	she	think	I’m	a	fraud?	Does	she
think	I’m	running	a	game?	Does	she	think	that	underneath	it	all	I’m	still	really	her
little	 brother?	 I	 don’t	 know	 and	 I	 don’t	 much	 care.	 The	 fact	 that	 she’s	 read
Damnedest	doesn’t	mean	that	she	and	I	can	speak;	it	means	she	should	know	we
can’t.	She	doesn’t	seem	to	be	clear	on	that.	Maybe	she	thinks	the	enlightenment
thing	is	just	my	day	job	and	that	I	can	step	out	of	that	role	to	be	with	someone	who
knows	the	real	me.
	
“I	don’t	know.	I	suppose	it’s	a	responsibility.”
	

=== Page 27 ===
“You	don’t	know?	Obviously	these	people	are	strongly	influenced	by	you.	You
don’t	think	that’s	a	big	responsibility?”
	
I	shrug.	The	first	thing	she	said	to	me	when	we	got	together	was	that	I	wasn’t
dressed	well	enough	for	the	restaurant.	Such	a	statement	is	so	alien	to	me	that	I
could	only	shrug.	Now	it	seems	that	every	statement	she	makes	is	so	alien	to	me
that	I	can	only	shrug.
	
In	accepting	this	lunch	engagement,	my	hope	was	that	I	could	slip	back	into	my	old
persona	enough	to	manage	a	civil	meal.	That	was	too	hopeful.	I	can	no	longer
impersonate	myself	and	I	am	simply	unable	to	formulate	a	reply	to	anything	she	has
to	say;	I’ve	forgotten	my	lines.	We	don’t	share	a	common	tongue	and	there’s	no	way
I	can	make	her	see	that.	From	her	point	of	view	she’s	saying	perfectly	normal,
conversational	things.
	
“Yes,	I	suppose	it’s	a	big	responsibility,”	I	say,	trying	to	say	something	that	sounds
like	I’m	saying	something.
	
She	 lowers	 her	 voice.	 “You	 hear	 a	 lot	 about	 people	 in	 your	 position	 taking
advantage	of	that	responsibility	for,”	she	lowers	her	voice,	“unsavory	purposes.	I
hope	you	would	never	do	something	like	that.”
	
I	could	simply	tell	her	what	the	preview	copy	of	the	book	was	meant	to	tell	her,	that
we	are	no	longer	related	because	what	I	am	now	doesn’t	relate.	But	why	say	it?	To
satisfy	myself?	It	wouldn’t.	To	inform	her?	It	wouldn’t.
	
“You	mean	sex	stuff?	That	sort	of	thing?”
	
“Whatever.	Power	corrupts.	I	just	hope	you’ll	be	careful.”
	
Sweet.	Big	sister	giving	little	brother	some	advice	on	how	to	shoulder	the	burden	of
power.	Being	in	advertising,	perhaps	she	thinks	we	have	something	in	common;
wielding	the	power	to	influence	people’s	thoughts.	Maybe	she	thinks	we’re	in	the
same	business,	I	don’t	know.
	
I	set	down	my	fork	and	sit	back.	“Well,	when	I	walk	through	the	house,	I	always
have	someone	proceed	me	with	a	boom-box	playing	Darth	Vader	theme	music	to
lend	a	weighty	and	ominous	air	to	my	approach.	And	I	certainly	don’t	dress	like
this.	I	have,	you	know,	the	robes,	the	beads,	and	I	always	carry	fresh	flowers.	Just
trappings,	all	very	tiresome,	really,	but	the	underlings	expect	it.	There	was	a	little

=== Page 28 ===
resistance	at	first	to	having	them	call	me	Shri	Shri	Shri	Shri	Jed,	but	they	got	the
hang	of	it.	And	remembering	to	speak	in	the	first	person	plural	there	and	singular
here	can	take	a	little	getting	used	to,	but	we	are—I	mean,	uh,	I	am—happy	to	make
the	effort.	Noblesse	oblige	and	all.”
	
She	stares	at	me	for	a	long	moment,	then	bursts	into	laughter.	I	guess	some	ice	has
broken	because	we	are	able	to	continue	in	a	lighter	and	friendlier	manner,	and
eventually	say	goodbye	with	genuine	fondness.
	
I	doubt	I’ll	ever	see	her	again,	but	I’m	happy	knowing	she’s	still	in	the	world.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Blues	for	Buddha
	
Whether	there	be	prophecies,	they	shall	fail;
whether	there	be	tongues,	they	shall	cease;
whether	there	be	knowledge,	it	shall	vanish	away.
	
For	we	know	in	part,	and	we	prophesy	in	part.
But	when	that	which	is	perfect	is	come,
then	that	which	is	in	part	shall	be	done	away.
	
When	I	was	a	child,	I	spake	as	a	child,
I	understood	as	a	child,
I	thought	as	a	child:
but	when	I	became	a	man,
I	put	away	childish	things.
	
1	Corinthians	13
	
	
Being	critical	of	Buddhism
	isn’t	easy.	Buddhism	is	the	most	likable	of	the	major
religions,	 and	 Buddhists	 are	 the	 perennial	 good	 guys	 of	 modern	 spirituality.
Beautiful	traditions,	lovely	architecture,	inspiring	statuary,	ancient	history,	the	Dalai
Lama;	what’s	not	to	like?
	

=== Page 29 ===
Everything	about	Buddhism	is	just	so—nice.	No	fatwahs	or	jihads,	no	inquisitions
or	crusades,	no	terrorists	or	pederasts,	just	nice	people	being	nice.	In	fact,	Buddhism
means	niceness.	Nice-ism.
	
At	least,	it	should.
	
Buddha	means	Awakened	One,	so	Buddhism	can	be	taken	to	mean	Awake-ism.
Awakism.	It	would	therefore	be	natural	to	think	that	if	you	were	looking	to	wake	up,
then	Buddhism,	i.e.,	Awakism,	would	be	the	place	to	look.
	
	
The	Light	is	Better	Over	Here
	
Such	 thinking,	 however,	 would	 reveal	 a	 dangerous	 lack	 of	 respect	 for	 the
opposition.	 Maya,	 goddess	 of	 delusion,	 has	 been	 doing	 her	 job	 with	 supreme
mastery	 since	 the	 first	 spark	 of	 self-awareness	 flickered	 in	 some	 monkey’s
brainbox,	and	the	idea	that	the	neophyte	truth-seeker	can	just	sign	up	with	the
Buddhists,	read	some	books,	embrace	some	new	concepts	and	slam	her	to	the	mat
would	be	a	bit	on	the	naive	side,	(as	billions	of	sincere	but	unsuccessful	seekers
over	the	last	twenty-five	centuries	might	grudgingly	attest).
	
On	the	other	hand,	why	not?	How’d	this	get	so	turned	around?	It’s	just	truth.
Shouldn’t	truth	be,	like,	the	simplest	thing?	Shouldn’t	someone	who	wants	to	find
something	as	ubiquitous	and	unchanging	as	truth	be	able	to	do	so?	How	can	anyone
manage	 to	 not	 find	 truth?	 And	 here’s	 this	 venerable	 organization	 supposedly
dedicated	to	just	that	very	thing,	even	named	for	it,	and	it’s	a	total	flop.
	
So	what’s	the	problem?
	
	
Why	doesn’t	Buddhism	produce	Buddhas?
	
The	 problem	 arises	 from	 the	 fact	 that	 Buddhists,	 like	 everyone	 else,	 insist	 on
reconciling	the	irreconcilable.	They	don’t	just	want	to	awaken	to	the	true,	they	also
want	to	make	sense	of	the	untrue.	They	want	to	have	their	cake	and	eat	it	too,	so
they	end	up	with	nonsensical	theories,	divergent	schools,	sagacious	doubletalk,	and
zero	Buddhas.
	
Typical	of	their	insistence	on	reconciling	the	irreconcilable	is	the	Buddhist	concept
of	Two	Truths,	a	poignant	two-word	joke	they	don’t	seem	to	get,	and	yet	this	sort	of

=== Page 30 ===
perversely	irrational	thinking	is	near	the	very	heart	of	the	failed	search	for	truth.	We
don’t	want	truth,	we	want	a	particular	truth;	one	that	doesn’t	threaten	ego;	one	that
doesn’t	exist.	We	insist	on	a	truth	that	makes	sense	given	what	we	know,	not
knowing	that	we	know	nothing.
	
Nothing	about	Buddhism	is	more	revealing	than	the	Four	Noble	Truths	which,	not
being	true,	are	of	dubious	nobility.	They	form	the	basis	of	Buddhism,	so	it’s	clear
from	the	outset	that	the	Buddhists	have	whipped	up	a	proprietary	version	of	truth
shaped	more	by	market	forces	than	any	particular	concern	for	the	less	consumer-
friendly,	albeit	true,	truth.
	
Buddhism	 may	 be	 spiritually	 filling,	 even	 nourishing,	 but	 insofar	 as	 truth	 is
concerned,	it’s	just	the	same	old	junkfood	in	a	different	package.	You	can	eat	it
every	day	of	your	life	and	die	exactly	as	awakened	as	the	day	you	signed	up.
	
	
Bait	&	Switch
	
Buddhism	 is	 a	 classic	 bait-and-switch	 operation.	 We’re	 attracted	 by	 the
enlightenment	in	the	window,	but	as	soon	as	we’re	in	the	door	they	start	steering	us
over	to	the	compassion	aisle.	Buddhists	could	be	honest	and	change	their	name	to
Compassionism,	but	who	wants	that?
	
There’s	the	rub.	They	can’t	get	us	in	the	door	with	compassion,	and	they	can’t
deliver	on	the	promise	of	enlightenment.
	
It’s	not	limited	to	compassion,	of	course.	Their	shelves	are	stocked	with	all	sorts	of
goodies	and	enticements,	practically	anything	anyone	could	ever	want,	with	just	the
one	rather	notable	exception.
	
If	they	had	just	stopped	when	they	had	
Anicca
,	impermanence,	and	
Anatta
,	no-self,
then	they	would	have	had	a	true	and	effective	teaching	they	could	be	proud	of,
except	 there	 would	 be	 no	 they	 because	 Buddhism	 would	 have	 died	 with	 the
Buddha.	They’d	have	a	good	product,	but	no	customers.
	
This	untruth-in-advertising	is	the	kind	of	game	you	have	to	play	if	you	want	to	stay
successful	in	a	business	where	the	customer	is	always	wrong.	You	can	either	go	out
of	business	honestly,	or	thrive	by	giving	the	people	what	they	want.	What	they	say
they	want	and	what	they	really	want,	though,	are	two	very	different	things.
	

=== Page 31 ===
	
Me	Me	Me
	
To	the	outside	observer,	much	of	Buddhist	knowledge	and	practice	seems	focused
on	spiritual	self-improvement.	This,	too,	is	hard	to	speak	against,	except	within	the
context	of	awakening	from	delusion.	Then	it’s	easy.
	
There	is	no	such	thing	as	true	self,	so	any	pursuit	geared	toward	its	aggrandizement,
betterment,	upliftment,	elevation,	evolution,	glorification,	salvation,	etc,	is	utter
folly.	How	much	more	so	any	endeavor	undertaken	merely	to	increase	one’s	own
happiness	or	contentment	or,	I’m	embarrassed	just	to	say	it,	bliss?
	
Self	is	ego	and	ego	resides	exclusively	in	the	dreamstate.	If	you	want	to	break	free
of	the	dreamstate,	you	must	break	free	of	self,	not	stroke	it	to	make	it	purr	or	groom
it	for	some	imagined	brighter	future.
	
	
Maya’s	House	of	Enlightenment
	
The	trick	with	being	critical	of	so	esteemed	and	beloved	an	institution	is	not	to	get
dragged	down	into	the	morass	of	details	and	debate.	It’s	very	simple:	If	Buddhism	is
about	awakening,	people	should	be	waking	up.	If	it’s	not	about	awakening,	they
should	change	the	name.
	
Of	course,	Buddhism	isn’t	completely	unique	in	resorting	to	shoddy	marketing
tactics.	This	same	gulf	between	promise	and	performance	is	found	in	all	systems	of
human	spirituality.	We’re	looking	at	it	in	Buddhism	because	that’s	where	it’s	most
pronounced.	No	disrespect	to	the	Buddha	is	intended.	If	there	was	a	Buddha	and	he
was	 enlightened,	 then	 it’s	 Buddhism	 that	 insults	 his	 memory,	 not	 healthy
skepticism.	Blame	the	naked	emperor’s	retinue	of	lackeys	and	lickspittles,	not	the
unbeguiled	lad	who	merely	states	the	obvious.
	
Buddhism	is	arguably	the	most	elevated	of	man’s	great	belief	systems.	If	you	want
to	enjoy	the	many	valuable	benefits	it	has	to	offer,	then	I	wouldn’t	presume	to	utter
a	syllable	against	it.	But,	if	you	want	to	escape	from	the	clutches	of	Maya,	then	I
suggest	you	take	a	closer	look	at	the	serene	face	on	all	those	golden	statues,	and	see
if	it	isn’t	really	hers.
	
	
*	*	*

=== Page 32 ===
	
	
	
Bonus	Content	from

=== Page 33 ===
Spiritually	Incorrect	Enlightenment
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Jed	McKenna	Interview
	
Q:
	Spiritually	Incorrect	Enlightenment	starts	out	strangely.	First,	with	the	Call	me
Ahab	 line	 in	 the	 first	 chapter,	 then	 the	 next	 two	 chapters	 which	 are	 a	 little
unsettling,	almost	alienating.	What	was	the	thinking	there?
	
I	have	a	lot	of	notes	and	I	write	a	lot	of	stuff	that	doesn’t	get	into	the	books.	Usually,
as	a	book	takes	shape,	as	with	any	creative	process,	the	stuff	that	doesn’t	belong
gets	weeded	out.	That’s	what	I	thought	might	happen	with	some	or	all	of	those	first
three	chapters,	especially	the	second	and	third,	the	California	chapters.	I	was	a	little
surprised	they	stayed	in.
	
Q:
	But	it’s	you	that	left	them	in.
	
Yes	and	no.	I’m	a	participant	in	the	creation	of	these	books	but	I’m	also	very	much
an	observer.	I	receive	clear	direction	and	I	follow	it,	whether	it’s	writing	books	or
anything	else.	I	move	with	the	tides	on	an	ocean	where	the	difference	between	self
and	 other	 becomes	 merely	 theoretical.	 Even	 in	 the	 dreamstate	 my	 character	 is
almost	fully	dissolved	back	into	the	ocean	so,	for	instance,	an	outside	observer
might	say	that	Jed	McKenna	wrote	these	books,	but	from	my	perspective	there	is	no
such	distinction.	Distinctions	are	a	dreamstate	phenomenon	and	even	though	I	exist
and	 write	 in	 the	 dreamstate	 to	 publish	 dreamed	 up	 books	 for	 a	 dreamed	 up
readership,	I	don’t	see	things	as	being	distinguished	from	one	another	the	way	I	did
before	awakening.	This	is	about	segregation	and	integration,	about	seeing	things	as
apart	where	there	is	no	apartness.	This	integration,	re-integration,	is	the	state	toward
which	everyone	is	in	constant	motion;	away	from	false	segregation	back	to	oneness.
This	constant	motion	resembles	a	degrading	orbit;	round	and	round,	closer	and
closer,	 gripped	 by	 invisible	 forces	 ceaselessly	 pulling	 us	 in,	 back	 to	 our	 own
centers,	the	one	center	of	all.	It	is	this	gravity	emanating	from	the	exact	center	of
self	that	powers	the	returning	motion	of	the	Tao.	Everyone	is	in	this	orbit.	Life	is	in
this	orbit.	The	First	Step,	on	the	other	hand,	is	the	abrupt	course	change	out	of	this
orbit	into	a	straightline	approach.	Until	the	First	Step	we’re	still	in	orbit.	After	the
First	Step,	life	in	orbit	is	over	and	collision	is	imminent.
	

=== Page 34 ===
Q:
	Collision	with	the	planet?
	
So	it	appears.	From	space	the	planet	might	look	like	God,	or	Truth,	or	True	Self,
something	like	that	depending	on	the	eye	of	the	beholder,	but	the	destination	is
always	the	same;	the	one	source,	the	gravity	well	that	reaches	out	from	the	center	of
the	planet	and	pulls	us	all	in.	Prior	to	the	First	Step,	one	maintains	a	gradually
accelerating	slow-approach	orbit.	After	the	First	Step,	one	shoots	like	a	missile
straight	at	the	planet’s	center,	heedless	of	consequences,	only	to	discover	at	the
moment	of	impact	that	there’s	really	no	planet,	no	gravity,	no	self,	no	nuthin’.
	
No	one	can	explain	this	in	a	way	that	makes	any	sense	so	the	answer	I	give	when
asked	is	come	see	for	yourself.	Break	out	of	orbit.	Don’t	worry	about	getting	to	the
planet,	a	decaying	orbit	will	get	you	there	sooner	or	later.	Everyone	wants	to	wake
up	by	hastening	or	altering	their	orbit	and,	as	the	results	clearly	indicate,	it	doesn’t
seem	to	make	any	difference.	There’s	only	one	way;	you	have	to	break	out	of	orbit.
That’s	the	First	Step	and	that	must	be	the	goal	of	the	person	in	orbit,	not	spiritual
enlightenment	or	Nirvana	or	any	of	that.	Yes,	it’s	a	suicide	run.	There	is	no	return,
no	turning	back.	There	will	be	nothing	to	come	back	to.	If	you’re	into	the	whole
happily-ever-after	thing,	stay	in	orbit	and	think	in	terms	of	karma	and	dharma	and
countless	lifetimes	in	which	to	follow	the	homeward	trek.	If	you’ve	had	enough	of
that	then	it’s	time	to	switch	your	attention	away	from	all	the	spiritual	gibberish	and
start	thinking	about	breaking	out	of	orbit	for	a	suicide	run.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	A	significant	part	of	your	audience	lives	in	California.	It	was	almost	painful	to
hear	 you	 say	 you	 hate	 LA	 and	 that	 part	 of	 the	 reason	 for	 that	 is	 probably
Californians.
	
Yeah.	I	swing	back	to	comment	on	that	later	in	the	book.	I’m	an	East	Coast	guy
bad-mouthing	the	West	Coast	is	all.	I	lived	in	Montecito	and	further	north	for	a	time
and	liked	it	well	enough,	the	East	just	seems	more	real	to	me.	All	I	can	think	about
when	I’m	in	Southern	California	is	getting	out,	but	it’s	only	a	personal	preference.	I
still	have	preferences	and	I	wanted	to	accentuate	that	apparent	paradox.	If	there’s
ever	 a	 third	 book	 there	 might	 not	 be	 too	 much	 in	 the	 way	 of	 my	 personal
preferences,	or	the	few	that	are	left	might	come	out	very	strongly	and	specifically.
To	me,	Southern	California	feels	like	the	Mecca	of	Ego.	A	strong	distaste	for	ego	is
really	the	last	of	my	strongly	held	preferences	and	it’s	not	likely	to	disappear.	This
is	the	ongoing	minimalization	of	self	I	talked	about	in	Damnedest.	I’m	kind	of
chronicling	the	second	decade	of	the	awakened	being	as	I	live	it.	I	can	forecast

=== Page 35 ===
trends,	but	then	I	have	to	live	them	too.	I	said	I’d	become	less	tolerant	and	I	am.
The	tattered	remnants	of	self	hang	loosely	from	me.	I	almost	have	to	clutch	at	them
to	have	any	presence	at	all.
	
Q:
	You	make	it	sound	like	the	awakening	process	continues	even	now.
	
In	a	way.	The	awakening	part	was	a	very	distinct	event,	like	a	nuclear	explosion,
and	occurred	for	me	many	years	ago.	The	post-awakening	process	taking	place
since	then	is	like	the	protracted	effects	of	radiation	poisoning.	Your	nose	doesn’t	fall
of	in	the	first	instant,	it	stays	on	for	awhile.	You	know	it’s	not	going	to	stay	on	for
long	so	you	enjoy	it	while	you	can.	You	know	what’s	coming,	you	know	it’s
inevitable;	you	don’t	fear	it	or	seek	to	avoid	it.	On	the	other	hand,	you’re	fond	of
your	nose.	I	have	a	fondness	for	my	nose	so	maybe	I	staple	it	on	or	use	a	little	duct
tape	 so	 I	 can	 keep	 it	 a	 little	 longer.	 I’m	 not	 making	 an	 argument	 for	 this	 or
defending	 a	 position,	 I’m	 just	 sharing	 my	 observations	 of	 the	 process.	 The
awakening	is	complete,	perfect,	and	irreversible,	but	no	outer	representation	can
reflect	the	inner	state.	At	any	moment	since	the	point	of	awakening	I	can	and	have
shaken	myself	like	a	wet	dog	to	cast	off	all	the	rags	of	self;	the	tatters	of	costume.
	
Q:
	So	you	can	throw	off	self	and	put	it	back	on?
	
Such	as	it	is.	It’s	in	an	advanced	state	of	decay	and	I	can’t	stop	or	reverse	that,	but	I
can	try	to	squeeze	some	further	use	out	of	what	remains.	I	suppose	I’ll	be	able	to
fake	my	own	personhood	for	as	long	as	I	live,	but	the	veneer	is	getting	pretty	thin.
	
Q:
	It’s	only	in	interacting	with	people,	with	ego,	that	this	is	a	problem?
	
Yes.	I	have	no	other	reason	to	slip	into	character.	It’s	not	really	much	of	a	problem,
though.	Not	interacting	with	people	is	no	great	hardship	for	me.
	
Q:
	And	it’s	not	theoretical,	right?	You’re	not	speculating,	you’re	describing	your
actual	experience?
	
Yes.	 My	 experience	 is	 that	 of	 a	 non-egoic	 being	 who	 can	 wrap	 himself	 in	 a
threadbare	ego	when	necessary.
	
Q:
	And	you	don’t	see	the	paradox?
	
The	whole	selfless	self	thing?	I’ll	address	this	by	saying	that	the	enlightened	state	is
not,	as	is	commonly	supposed,	the	special	state.	The	unenlightened	state	is	the

=== Page 36 ===
magical,	 mysterious,	 incomprehensible	 state.	 Awake	 is	 just	 awake.	 It’s	 not
something	 more,	 it’s	 everything	 less.	 My	 state	 is	 natural	 and	 easy.	 I	 carry	 no
baggage.	I	labor	under	no	delusion.	I	don’t	spend	my	lifeforce	animating	a	fictional
persona.	All	paradox	lies	with	the	unawakened	state.	The	awakened	don’t	have
something	 that	 the	 unawakened	 are	 missing,	 it’s	 the	 other	 way	 around.	 The
unawakened	possess	massive	structures	of	false	belief.	They	create	and	maintain
these	vast	realms	of	past,	present	and	future;	of	great	meaning	and	importance;	of	a
deep	 and	 wide	 emotional	 range;	 all	 woven	 together	 out	 of	 sheer	 nothingness.
Something	from	nothing;	that’s	the	magic,	that’s	the	special	state.	The	unawakened
state	is	the	one	that	requires	such	ceaseless	dedication	and	devotion	and	which
seems	so	fantastically	improbable.	The	awakened	state	is	nothing	compared	to	that.
	
Q:
	That	doesn’t	sound	so	good.
	
I	never	said	it	was.
	
Q:
	Are	you	saying	it’s	not?
	
No.	The	lifeforce	I’m	not	using	to	project	a	false	self	is	now	available	for	much
more	fun	and	interesting	purposes.	It’s	a	whole	different	universe	once	all	that	petty
self	crap	has	been	left	behind.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	So,	back	to	the	first	unsettling	chapters—
	
Unsettling	is	the	right	way	to	think	of	it.	That	probably	reflects	the	higher	intention
at	work.	I	look	at	those	first	few	chapters	like	an	establishing	shot	in	film,	providing
the	viewer	with	an	overview	of	where	events	are	taking	place.	The	first	chapter,
Loomings,	which	is	the	title	of	the	first	chapter	in	Moby-Dick,	is	like	striking	a
gong	to	wake	everyone	up	and	let	them	know	that	the	show	has	started	and	that	it’s
a	little	weird;	that	something	different	is	going	on.	Then	the	two	California	chapters
continue	this	sort	of	destabilizing	weirdness.	The	single	question	underlying	the
California	chapters	is	stated	in	chapter	two:	“Sure,	you	all	meditate	and	do	whatever
spiritual	practices,	but	you	know	that’s	not	really	going	anywhere,	right?”	That’s	an
unsettling	question.	Anyone	reading	the	book	should	be	taken	up	short	by	that;	put
themselves	at	that	dinner	table	and	look	at	their	own	Operation	Fizzle	and	ask
themselves	 serious	 questions	 about	 what	 they’re	 really	 doing	 with	 all	 this
spirituality	stuff.
	

=== Page 37 ===
Q:
	So	you	were	intentionally	offensive?
	
Part	of	the	intent	might	have	been	to	start	out	with	a	challenge.	Suicide,	Nazis,
catshit,	teen	angst.	Is	it	funny	or	offensive?	Good	spirited	or	mean?	Is	Jed	arrogant
or	something	else?	Do	I	like	him?	What	does	it	mean	if	I	don’t?	Upon	whom	would
that	really	reflect?
	
Q:
	Can	an	enlightened	person	behave	this	way?
	
Right,	can	this	guy	be	enlightened	if	he	acts	this	way?	Talks	this	way?	Sticks	this
semi-belligerent	stuff	in	the	front	of	his	book?	Where’s	the	unconditional	love?
Where’s	the	compassionate	heart?	Or,	wait,	maybe	it’s	my	preconceived	notions
about	spirituality	and	enlightenment	that	are	screwy.	Maybe	I	have	to	go	back	and
think	 about	 what	 it	 would	 really	 be	 like	 to	 be	 an	 enlightened	 person	 in	 an
unenlightened	 world.	 Maybe	 I’ve	 been	 sold	 a	 bill	 of	 goods.	 Maybe	 it’s	 the
sweetness	and	light	version	that	doesn’t	make	sense.
	
And	yet,	in	the	second	book	I	would	hope	that	the	reader	has	read	the	first	book	and
has	some	theoretical	idea	of	what	enlightenment—truth-realization,	abiding	non-
dual	awareness—really	means.	The	second	book	seems	like	more	fun	to	me	if	you
approach	 it	 from	 the	 perspective	 of	 having	 granted	 that	 Jed	 McKenna	 is	 an
awakened	being.	We’ve	already	established	that	in	the	first	book,	so	that	should	free
us	up	to	explore,	to	see	what	it’s	all	about,	what	it’s	like	to	be	in	this	state,	to	ask
better	questions;	not,	Is	this	guy	enlightened?,	but,	What	does	it	mean	that	an
enlightened	being	acts	this	way?	What	am	I	being	shown	about	the	awakened	state?
	
I	don’t	want	to	make	this	all	sound	too	carefully	thought	out	because	the	books
really	fall	into	place	on	their	own.	This	is	just	my	interpretation	for	how	it	is	and	my
reasons	for	not	changing	it.
	
Q:
	You’re	interpreting	your	own	book	just	like	a	reader	would?
	
Something	like	that.	Those	were	the	first	three	chapters	since	the	first	draft	and	they
never	moved.	I	looked	at	them	many	times,	wondering	if	it	wasn’t	a	bit	much,	and
finally	realized	that	in	a	book	called	Spiritually	Incorrect	Enlightenment,	a	bit	much
was	probably	about	right.	Also,	I	trust	the	thing	that	put	them	there	more	than	I	trust
the	thing	in	me	that	wanted	to	change	them.
	
And	really,	why	not	put	it	right	up	front?	The	book	is	called	Spiritually	Incorrect
Enlightenment,	but	what	does	that	mean?	It	means	that	getting	there	and	being	there

=== Page 38 ===
isn’t	what	we’ve	been	told.	You	look	at	modern	spirituality	and	all	you	see	is	the
same	tired	drivel	being	endlessly	recycled;	love,	compassion,	no-mind,	higher	self,
levels	of	consciousness	and	so	on.	A	noxious	muck	in	which,	as	is	amply	borne	out
by	results,	no	clarity	or	progress	is	possible.	There	is	no	greater	failure	in	the	history
of	mankind	than	the	spiritual	quest,	the	search	for	truth,	and	yet	everyone	continues
just	as	everyone	always	has,	using	the	same	maps	and	directions,	the	same	guides
and	the	same	routes.	It’s	nuts.	Sooner	or	later	you	have	to	come	to	the	point	of
saying,	“Hey,	wait	a	minute,	this	is	crazy.	I	want	to	get	off	this	merry-go-round	and
get	moving.	How	do	I	break	free	from	this	cycle	of	bumper-sticker	platitudes	and
actually	take	some	responsibility	for	my	life?”	If	you’re	reading	books	by	Jed
McKenna,	 that’s	 what	 you’re	 playing	 at	 the	 edge	 of;	 self-determination.	 Not
because	it’s	of	any	importance,	or	to	please	anyone,	or	to	line	up	a	cozy	afterlife,
but	simply	because	it’s	honest.	Ultimately,	that’s	all	we’re	talking	about;	living	an
honest	life.	Being	honest.
	
Q:
	So	what’s	the	solution?	How	do	we	break	free?
	
Look	at	Hercules	in	the	Augean	stables.	He	could	have	picked	up	a	shovel	and	spent
his	entire	life	shoveling	shit,	never	making	any	progress	because	they’re	always
making	it	faster	than	anyone	can	shovel	it.	What	does	he	do	instead?	He	reroutes	a
river	so	it	flows	through	the	stables	and	with	this	one	act	all	the	muck	is	washed
away	once	and	for	all.	That’s	the	solution;	don’t	try	to	do	battle	with	confusion	and
mediocrity.	The	solution	to	a	problem	does	not	exist	at	the	level	of	the	problem.
Rise	above	the	level	at	which	confusion	and	mediocrity	exist.	Think	for	yourself.
Look	 for	 yourself.	 See	 the	 big	 picture.	 Life	 is	 a	 one-man	 show.	 Turn	 up	 the
houselights	and	see	for	yourself,	directly,	without	the	obstruction	and	distorting
filters	of	interpreters	or	middlemen.	What	could	be	simpler?
	
Q:
	You’re	saying	that	people	should—
	
I	have	no	opinion	about	what	anyone	should	or	shouldn’t	do.	Some	people	like	the
smell	of	manure.	In	the	context	of	this	discussion,	most	people	do.	It’s	warm	and
familiar	and	safe.	When	it	starts	smelling	like	shit,	like	stagnation	and	death,	like	a
dark,	fetid	dungeon,	then	you	start	wanting	to	do	something	to	get	away	from	it.
When	that	happens,	then	you’re	starting	to	leave	all	the	swami	wannabes	behind
and	represent	your	own	interests.	At	that	point	I	can	provide	some	simple	guidance:
Open	your	eyes.	Look.	See	why	it	smells	so	bad.	Nourish	your	discontent.	Cultivate
negative	self-esteem.	Elevate	self-loathing	to	a	spiritual	practice.	Proceed	on	the
hypothesis	that	everything	you	are	is	a	lie	and	everything	you	know	is	wrong	and
try	to	disprove	it.

=== Page 39 ===
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	Do	you	think	there’ll	be	a	third	book?
	
Maybe.	I	seem	to	enjoy	the	writing	so	I	guess	I’m	not	done	with	it.	There	are
several	things	in	the	works;	maybe	something	will	actually	materialize.
	
Q:
	Do	you	think	there	might	be	more	surprises	like	with	Moby-Dick?
	
I	don’t	know.	I	certainly	didn’t	see	the	white	whale	coming	until	it	was	right	on	top
of	me.
	
Q:
	Besides	the	revelations	about	Moby-Dick,	the	other	very	surprising	thing	about
SIE	is	that	you	steer	readers	away	from	enlightenment	and	toward	the	state	you	call
Human	Adulthood.
	
Human	Adulthood	is	the	real	prize.	Anyone	who	is	involved	in	spiritual	pursuits	is
actually	pursuing	Human	Adulthood	but	probably	doesn’t	know	it.	The	point	I
wanted	to	make	is	that	Human	Adulthood	is	what	everyone	really	wants	and	not
many	people	really	have.	The	child	has	to	die	for	the	adult	to	be	born	and	this	very
seldom	 happens.	 It’s	 a	 cataclysmic,	 death/rebirth	 event.	 Once	 born	 into	 this
adulthood,	all	of	life	becomes	about	growth	and	discovery.	The	universe	is	the
playground	of	the	Human	Adult.	So	anyway,	that	was	a	major	theme	in	Incorrect
because	that’s	what	it’s	really	all	about.	Religion	and	spirituality	are	all	about	not
going	 anywhere.	 Enlightenment	 is	 all	 about	 going	 and	 never	 stopping.	 Human
Adulthood	is	all	about	wandering	and	exploring	and	playing.	It’s	about	living	life
and	fulfilling	potential	and	expanding	without	limits.	All	the	good	things	that	can	be
said	about	enlightenment	and	religion	and	spirituality	are	the	natural	qualities	of
Human	 Adulthood;	 manifestation	 of	 desires,	 flow	 and	 effortless	 functioning,
positive	emotions	that	are	not	fear-based	such	as	awe	and	gratitude	and	agape,
which	reflects	an	understanding	of	the	connectedness	of	things.	This	is	obviously
what	everyone	really	wants,	not	truth-realization,	so	that’s	what	I	tried	to	talk	about.
	
Q:
	You	must	have	an	intense	sense	of	satisfaction	at	having	created	such	superb
books,	but	the	real	reason	I	bring	it	up	is	that	I	suspect	you	don’t.
	
You’re	right,	I	don’t.	I	don’t	have	that	sort	of	relationship	to	the	books.	No	sense	of
pride	or	ownership,	no	self-congratulatory	feeling	of	accomplishment.	In	trying	to
answer	 this	 question	 I’m	 struggling	 just	 to	 think	 of	 what	 type	 of	 feeling	 or

=== Page 40 ===
attachment	an	author	might	have	for	his	works.	In	any	event,	the	books	are	fine,
that’s	all.	I	was	designed	to	write	them	and	I	did.	They’re	adequate.	I	am	satisfied
that	 I	 have	 done	 well	 and	 there’s	 nothing	 more	 to	 it.	 I	 have	 played	 my	 part
adequately.
	
Q:
	Adequately,	meaning	that	you	could	have	done	better?
	
Meaning	I	could	have	done	worse.	I’ve	been	pretty	good	about	allowing	the	process
to	work.	The	books	are	as	they	should	be.
	
Q:
	Are	you	totally	beyond	compliment	or	insult?
	
I	don’t	know	about	beyond,	that	might	be	misleading.	I	no	longer	possess	the	aspect
of	self	that	can	be	praised	or	insulted.	There	is	no	place	for	death	to	enter,	that	kind
of	thing.	I	don’t	think	of	myself	as	a	writer	or	teacher	or	anything	else.	I	just	did
what	was	indicated.	If	it	remains	indicated,	I’ll	do	it	some	more.	If	not,	I	won’t.	I
really	wouldn’t	mind	just	being	done	with	the	whole	spirituality	thing.	It	bears
repeating	that	I’m	not	a	spiritual	person.	If	it	weren’t	for	the	writing	I’d	have	no
further	connection	to	it	at	all.
	
Q:
	It’s	strange	to	think	of	a	spiritual	master,	teacher	and	author	as	being	unspiritual
or	aspiritual.	It	must	be	strange	for	you	to	write	for	this	audience.
	
Sure,	now	extend	that	a	bit	and	imagine	my	situation	in	trying	to	continue	to
perform	this	communicator	role.	The	fact	is	that	I	have	almost	no	memory	of	the
pre-awakened	state.	This	isn’t	a	fuzzy	feeling-level	sort	of	thing,	it’s	a	quite	specific
and	pronounced	gap	between	my	paradigm	and	the	unawakened	paradigm,	and	it
keeps	getting	wider	as	my	memories	of	my	own	life	in	the	other	paradigm	fade.
	
Q:
	That	must	be	very	challenging.
	
Only	where	ego	is	concerned.	It	wouldn’t	matter	to	me	at	all	except	for	the	writing.
To	write	books	I	have	to	speak	across	that	chasm	and	it’s	getting	impossibly	wide.
	
Q:
	So	it	makes	writing	the	books	a	challenge	because—
	
Because	empathy	is	nearly	gone.	I	have	practically	no	memory	of	what	it	means	to
believe	 anything.	 Most	 people	 reading	 this	 would	 probably	 see	 someone	 who
believes	in	televangelist	faith	healers	and	supermarket	tabloids	the	same	way	that	I
see	everyone.	From	my	perspective,	all	beliefs	are	nonsensical.	I	can	no	longer	draw

=== Page 41 ===
any	 real	 distinction	 between	 the	 merits	 of	 one	 and	 another.	 They’re	 all	 equal
because	they’re	all	untrue.	People	reading	this	probably	look	at	people	who	send
their	retirement	money	to	TV	preachers	and	wonder	how	they	can	be	so	gullible,
but	from	my	perspective,	everyone	is	that	gullible.	I	no	longer	see	any	difference
between	any	two	people’s	beliefs;	I	no	longer	can.	There	is	no	better	or	worse
belief,	no	more	or	less	true.	They’re	all	dreamstate	apparitions	that	have	no	reality
or	solidity	outside	of	the	dream.	I	can	make	out	no	distinction	other	than	that.	And
yet,	I	seem	to	have	this	task	of	trying	to	communicate	across	this	ever-widening
divide,	to	connect	with	minds	that	don’t	see	this	gulf	or	really	believe	it’s	there.
That’s	the	thing	that’s	happening;	the	gulf	is	getting	wider.	The	idea	that	the	Holy
Roman	Church	is	somehow	better	or	truer	or	more	valid	than	a	suicide	cult	is	lost
on	 me.	 I	 am	 no	 longer	 capable	 of	 perceiving	 or	 pretending	 to	 perceive	 such
distinctions.	I	know	that	one	has	more	adherents	than	the	other	but	that	doesn’t
mean	anything.	From	my	perspective,	a	person	is	either	in	the	process	of	waking	up
or	they’re	not.	That’s	the	only	distinction	I	see	clearly	anymore.	One	is	either
confronting	reality	or	denying	it.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Q:
	A	lot	of	people	who	have	met	you	through	the	books	are	eager	to	meet	you	in
person.	We’ve	seen	some	pretty	interesting	offers	of	what	people	would	give	or	do
to	be	with	you,	even	for	a	short	while.
	
That’s	not	indicated.
	
Q:
	You	sound	like	a	robot	at	times.
	
Even	to	myself,	but	the	fact	remains	that	I	am	designed	to	do	what	I’ve	done,	write,
but	I	am	not	designed	to	fulfill	a	public	role.
	
Q:
	Designed?
	
Designed,	destined,	dharmically-inclined,	whatever.	I	enjoy	writing,	but	I	don’t
enjoy	people,	which	is	to	say,	ego.	This	aversion	to	ego	seems	perfectly	normal	to
me.	I	don’t	think	it’s	at	all	strange,	so	it’s	not	likely	to	change.	In	fact,	I’d	encourage
everyone	 to	 develop	 a	 similar	 aversion.	 There’s	 only	 one	 false,	 petty,	 fearful,
dishonest	thing	in	the	universe	and	it’s	ego;	the	false	self.	I	think	anyone	who	really
comes	to	know	it	will	come	to	be	repulsed	by	it	and	that’s	certainly	moving	in	the
direction	of	waking	up.
	

=== Page 42 ===
In	any	case,	I’m	a	private	person	and	I	have	nothing	to	say	that	isn’t	in	the	books.	I
made	that	point	in	this	book.	There’s	simply	not	that	much	to	say	and	I’ve	said	it	all.
I	can	continue	to	write,	to	expand	on	themes,	go	deeper	into	some	topics,	but	that’s
about	it.	Anyone	who	wants	to	track	me	down,	ask	me	questions,	benefit	from
whatever	 they	 think	 I	 can	 offer,	 is	 operating	 purely	 from	 denial.	 It’s	 easy	 to
convince	 yourself	 otherwise,	 that	 seeking	 out	 a	 direct	 relationship	 with	 some
whoop-de-doo	spiritual	fella	is	the	mark	of	deep	commitment,	but	it’s	Maya	who’s
doing	 the	 convincing.	 What	 would	 I	 possibly	 have	 to	 say	 to	 someone?	 We’ve
already	determined	to	a	reasonable	certainty	that	there	are	no	valid	questions	left
unanswered	by	the	books,	so	what	would	I	do,	cite	page	numbers?	If	someone
comes	up	to	me	now	seeking	whatever,	all	I	could	tell	them	is,	“Maya	sent	you.	It’s
her	hand	up	your	ass,	turning	your	head,	moving	your	lips.	You	have	serious	work
to	do	and	the	only	reason	you	came	here	was	to	avoid	it.”
	
If	people	don’t	want	to	be	serious	about	this	they	don’t	have	to	be,	that’s	entirely
their	business,	but	from	the	very	outset	of	this	publishing	project	I	was	determined
that	I	would	not	allow	myself	to	be	drawn	into	people’s	avoidance	games.	Everyone
wants	to	talk	about	it,	but	there’s	nothing	to	say.	It’s	easy	to	take	a	trip,	pay	some
money,	give	up	some	comforts,	prostrate	yourself	at	someone’s	feet,	obey,	adore,
exalt,	whatever,	and	think	that	translates	into	something	positive,	some	sort	of
forward	motion,	but	these	are	all	the	acts	of	an	ego	seeking	to	divert	attention	away
from	the	real	issue	with	busywork	and	empty	gestures;	false	acts	of	surrender
allowing	us	to	convince	ourselves	that	we’re	striding	boldly	into	the	light	while
staying	safely	huddled	in	shadow.	No	one	needs	me	for	that.	Anyone	with	a	genuine
desire	to	face	the	issue	of	self	already	has	all	I	can	offer.	Use	the	process	of	Spiritual
Autolysis	and	try	to	figure	out	what’s	true.	Everything	else	is	about	being	turned
away.
	
Q:
	You	make	it	sound	so	simple,	but	in	reality	it’s	the	most	difficult	thing	anyone
can	ever	do.
	
Well,	there’s	the	critical	point.	It’s	not	a	matter	of	awakening,	it’s	a	matter	of	getting
to	the	First	Step.	Once	you’ve	taken	the	First	Step,	everything	else	follows	from
there.	Until	you’ve	taken	the	First	Step,	it’s	all	academic.	The	First	Step	is	the	true
starting	point	of	this	whole	process.	Everything	else	is	about	taking	or	not	taking	the
First	Step.	To	get	to	the	First	Step,	to	cross	that	starting	line,	you	have	to	cultivate
an	understanding	and	appreciation	of	the	forces	you’re	up	against;	of	Maya,	of	ego,
of	 the	 nature	 of	 self-delusion,	 of	 fear,	 or	 else	 no	 amount	 of	 dedication	 or
commitment	will	avail	in	the	least.	If	you’re	all	mind	and	no	heart	you	can	only	run
in	circles.	If	you’re	all	heart	and	no	mind	you	can	only	dig	yourself	into	a	deeper

=== Page 43 ===
hole.	Until	you	cross	the	real	starting	line,	take	the	First	Step,	it’s	all	just	a	hobby
like	golf	or	stamp	collecting.	Spirituality	itself	is	just	another	tool	of	denial,	the
most	effective	of	them	all,	and	that’s	why	the	search	for	truth	is	the	greatest	failure
in	the	history	of	man.
	
Here’s	a	simple	test.	If	it’s	soothing	or	comforting,	if	it	makes	you	feel	warm	and
fuzzy;	if	it’s	about	getting	into	pleasant	emotional	or	mental	states;	if	it’s	about
peace,	love,	tranquility,	silence	or	bliss;	if	it’s	about	a	brighter	future	or	a	better
tomorrow;	if	it	makes	you	feel	good	about	yourself	or	boosts	your	self-esteem,	tells
you	you’re	okay,	tells	you	everything’s	just	fine	the	way	it	is;	if	it	offers	to	improve,
benefit	or	elevate	you,	or	if	it	suggests	that	someone	else	is	better	or	above	you;	if
it’s	about	belief	or	faith	or	worship;	if	it	raises	or	alters	consciousness;	if	it	combats
stress	 or	 deepens	 relaxation,	 or	 if	 it’s	 therapeutic	 or	 healing,	 or	 if	 it	 promises
happiness	or	relief	from	unhappiness,	if	it’s	about	any	of	these	or	similar	things,
then	it’s	not	about	waking	up.	Then	it’s	about	living	in	the	dreamstate,	not	smashing
out	of	it.
	
On	the	other	hand,	if	it	feels	like	you’re	being	skinned	alive,	if	it	feels	like	a
prolonged	evisceration,	if	you	feel	your	identity	unraveling,	if	it	twists	you	up
physically	and	drains	your	health	and	derails	your	life,	if	you	feel	love	dying	inside
you,	 if	 it	 seems	 like	 death	 would	 be	 better,	 then	 it’s	 probably	 the	 process	 of
awakening.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Zen	and	the	Art	of	Self-Mutilation
	
This	 is	 adapted	 from	 a	 letter	 Jed	 McKenna	 wrote	 in	 reply	 to	 a	 self-professed
“serious	seeker”	who	made	an	impassioned	offer	to	turn	over	his	belongings	and
himself	in	exchange	for	being	accepted	as	Jed’s	student.
	
	
Dear	William,
	
You	don’t	need	to	add	me	to	your	equation,	you	need	to	subtract	yourself.	Begin	by
re-examining	 your	 assumptions.	 It’s	 clear	 from	 your	 letter	 that	 you	 consider
yourself	a	serious	person,	a	serious	seeker.	That’s	the	first	assumption	you’ll	want	to
challenge.	You’re	sure	that	a	serious	seeker	is	what	you	are	and	you	think	I	see	you

=== Page 44 ===
that	way	too,	but	this	is	not	the	case.	I	know	serious	when	I	see	it	and	I	know	a
handpuppet	of	Maya	when	I	see	it.	You	think	you’re	on	top	of	something,	but	the
only	thing	to	be	on	top	of	is	Maya,	and	she’s	on	top	of	you	like	a	house	on	a	mouse.
	
I	receive	many	offers	from	people	who	want	to	come	be	with	me.	Maybe	anyone
perceived	as	a	spiritual	solution-provider	receives	this	kind	of	offer,	I	wouldn’t
know.	People	want	to	give	up	everything;	their	stuff,	their	money,	their	very	lives,
really.	They	don’t	know	what	to	do	with	them	so	I	guess	they	figure,	why	not	dump
them	on	someone	who	seems	more	qualified,	like	a	mother	leaving	her	baby	on	the
rich	man’s	doorstep.	This	may	appear	to	be	the	ultimate	sacrifice,	a	grand	act	of
selflessness,	 but	 it’s	 really	 the	 ultimate	 entrenchment;	 fear	 gone	 haywire,	 ego
solidifying	its	hold	for	decades	to	come.	This	isn’t	how	you	surrender	the	self,	this
is	how	you	abandon	it;	abdicate	responsibility	for	your	own	life.	I	understand	this
can	be	a	very	tempting	response	to	a	very	perplexing	challenge.
	
Nevertheless,	your	gesture	suggests	that	you’re	in	an	uncomfortable	place.	Good	for
you.	That’s	always	the	best	place	to	be.	Being	so	uncomfortable	means	you’ll	soon
have	 to	 move.	 That’s	 good.	 That’s	 the	 motivation	 that	 drives	 the	 journey	 of
awakening.	It’s	a	series	of	steps,	none	taken	voluntarily,	all	necessitated	by	the	kind
of	discomfort	that	caused	you	to	write	your	letter	to	me.	The	motivation	behind
your	letter	is	good,	but	throwing	yourself	at	me	is	not	a	solution.	What	would	I	do
with	you?	What	possible	instruction	could	I	give?
	
Maybe	I	would	tell	you	to	cut	off	one	ounce	of	your	body	every	day	until	you	can
answer	the	question,	“What	is	true?”	Any	ounce	as	long	as	it’s	an	ounce.	That
should	bring	you	quickly	into	focus;	light	a	fire	under	you.	If	you	had	to	do	this,	cut
off	an	ounce	of	your	body	every	day,	how	much	time	do	you	think	you	would	waste
on	meditation?	On	attending	satsang	or	reading	the	latest	spiritual	bestseller?	Not
bloody	much.	You	would	soon	become	an	enlightenment	machine.	Sleep	and	food
would	be	reduced	to	barest	minimums.	Relationships	and	activities	once	deemed
essential	would	be	forgotten.	You	would	enter	into	a	burning	mania	of	single-
pointedness.	Soon,	anything	other	than	the	question	What	is	true?	would	seem
comically	irrelevant.	There’s	your	new-Zen;	Zen	for	the	new	millennium.	It	would
be	interesting	to	see	how	many	sand	gardens	and	books	of	pithy	aphorisms	the	self-
mutilation	approach	sells.
	
What	is	true?	That’s	the	only	koan	there	is;	the	only	one	anyone	ever	needs.	Every
day	you	don’t	answer	this	question,	another	ounce.	Take	a	moment	to	think	about
what	it	would	mean	to	have	to	sit	down	with	a	scalpel	at	a	certain	time	every	day
and	amputate	an	ounce	of	your	body.	You	would	quickly	have	to	learn	things	about

=== Page 45 ===
asking	and	answering,	about	how	the	process	works	and	doesn’t	work,	about	how	to
help	it	and	how	to	get	out	of	its	way.	You	would	have	to	learn	how	to	unlearn,	and
you	would	need	access	to	a	tremendous	amount	of	resources	in	order	to	accomplish
such	an	unlearning.	You	would	discard	clever	spiritual	concepts	for	cold	facts,
pretty	Eastern	vocabulary	for	words	of	scientific	precision.	The	process	is	one	of
seeing	clearly,	not	just	blindly	lashing	out.	That	act	of	seeing	clearly	takes	time	and
resources	and	the	mind	must	work	almost	ceaselessly	at	levels	far	beyond	the
everyday.
	
Would	this	work?	Well,	let’s	say	it	did.	Say	it	worked	in	500	days.	There	you	are
after	hacking	off	over	30	pounds	of	yourself,	and	now	you’re	truth-realized.	Now
you	know	directly,	for	yourself,	without	the	slightest	possibility	of	error,	the	truth.
You	are	free	from	delusion;	awakened	from	the	dreamstate.	You	have	joined	the
ranks	of	the	spiritually	enlightened.	You	look	at	your	toeless	feet,	fingerless	hands,
noseless	face,	earless	head,	and	what	would	you	say?	Here’s	what	you’d	say:
	
“Well,	uh,	that	was	kinda	dumb.”
	
I’m	happy	to	tell	you	that	right	up	front.	Waking	up	is	kinda	dumb.	There’s	no
point.	It’s	not	merely	pointless,	it’s	pointlessness.	Who	would	do	such	a	thing?	Only
someone	who	absolutely	couldn’t	not	do	it.	Once	you	become	the	person	who	can’t
not	do	it,	it’s	a	whole	different	thing,	but	trying	to	do	it	before	you	absolutely	must
is	as	ludicrous	as	slicing	off	parts	of	your	body.	(Which,	by	the	way,	don’t	do.)
	
As	barbaric	and	unthinkable	as	this	ounce-a-day	approach	may	seem,	I	can	assure
you	that	anyone	who	has	ever	managed	to	awaken	from	the	dreamstate	was	driven
by	equally	unendurable	mental	and	emotional	forces,	something	to	consider	the	next
time	you	hear	the	pop	guru	de	jour	recount	the	moment	of	his	glorious	epiphany:	“I
was	walking	in	the	park,	children	were	laughing,	birds	were	singing,	when	all	of	a
sudden...”
	
This	is	where	the	process	of	Spiritual	Autolysis	comes	in.	Spiritual	Autolysis	is
ultimately	about	clear	seeing;	clearly	seeing	what	is,	which	is	what	we	do	when	we
stop	seeing	what’s	not.	We	can	use	SA	to	raise	the	ordinary	powers	of	the	mind	up
to	the	extraordinary	levels	necessary	in	order	to	see	life	and	the	world	and	ourselves
as	they	truly	are.	Many	people	can	build	nuclear	reactors,	compose	symphonies,
conquer	nations	or	perform	brain	surgery,	but	very	few	can	see	what	is.
	
You	mention	in	your	letter	that	Alan	Watts	said	that	we	are	the	apertures	through
which	the	universe	sees	and	experiences	itself.	It	might	be	more	useful	to	say	we	are

=== Page 46 ===
the	imperfect	lenses	through	which	the	universe,	or	the	I-universe,	observes	itself;
through	which	the	undifferentiated	creates	the	illusion	of	differentiation.	It’s	an
amusing	 idea	 to	 play	 with.	 Self	 is	 distortion:	 distortion	 by	 design.	 The	 exact
distortion	of	the	lens	is	what	makes	the	exact	individual;	distortion	itself	is	self.	All
personal	attributes,	understood	this	way,	are	flaws;	imperfections	in	a	lens	that
exists	 to	 be	 imperfect.	 Imperfection	 does	 not	 otherwise	 exist,	 so	 an	 artificial
imperfection	is	created;	ego.	Seekers	may	strive	to	become	a	perfect	lens	but,	of
course,	the	perfect	lens	is	no-lens;	no	imperfections,	no	lens,	just	what	is.	Your
imperfections	are	not	only	who	and	what	you	are,	but	why	you	are.	The	finiteness
and	the	imperfection	of	the	lens	are	the	reasons	for	the	lens.	No-lens	means	the
universe	goes	unbeheld,	so	what	has	been	accomplished	by	this	act?	Who	is	served?
Who	benefits?	This	reinforces	my	earlier	statement	that	awakening	is	pointless—
trading	segregated	self	for	integrated	no-self,	finite	being	for	infinite	non-being—all
this	by	way	of	saying	not	that	perfection	is	unattainable,	but	that	it’s	unavoidable.
Perfection	is.	It	is	what	is.	There	is	no	other.	In	truth,	there	is	no	such	thing	as	non-
perfect	or	imperfect.	The	point	of	finite	and	imperfect	lenses	is	to	create	artificial
realms	of	finiteness	and	imperfection	in	which	to	play.
	
(The	original	letter	cites	an	Indian	saint	to	bolster	an	argument	and	then	proceeds
as	if	the	words	of	the	sage	were	accepted	fact.)
	
Don’t	come	at	me	brandishing	dead	guys	like	potent	allies.	It	doesn’t	help	you.
They	can’t	put	up	a	fight.	If	you	can’t	make	the	argument,	you	can’t	summon	the
dead	to	make	it	for	you.	That’s	a	logical	fallacy	called	Ipse	Dixit:	“He	himself	said
it.”	In	law,	it’s	called	the	dead	man’s	statute	and	it’s	inadmissible.	You	can’t	elect	a
ghost	proxy.	You’re	borrowing	authority	from	someone	who	is	incontestable	not	by
merit,	but	by	death.	Your	argument	is	unassailable	because	the	person	making	it	is
unavailable.	You’re	saying	that	if	he	were	here,	he	could	make	the	argument,	but
he’s	not	here.	You	can	borrow	words	and	ideas	and	quotations	from	the	terminally
absent	to	help	illustrate	a	point,	but	if	it’s	your	point,	it’s	your	problem;	your
argument	to	make.
	
In	any	case,	if	he	were	here,	he	couldn’t	make	the	argument.	I’m	familiar	with	the
beloved	teacher	of	whom	you	speak.	I	promise	you	that	if	he	were	here	I	could	slice
him	 into	 a	 garnish	 while	 rubbing	 my	 tummy	 and	 patting	 my	 head.	 No	 effort
required.	No	contest.	You	could	do	the	same	by	this	time	tomorrow	if	you’d	stop
being	lazy	and	start	thinking	for	yourself.
	
Your	spirituality	is	just	another	false	garment,	another	layer	of	the	lie	of	self.	Your
spirituality	defines	the	dimensions	of	your	cell	and	the	fact	that	you	don’t	see	that

=== Page 47 ===
tells	me	that	you	have	no	idea	where	you	are	or	whose	rules	you	are	living	under.
You	have	no	grasp	of	your	true	situation,	of	the	nature	of	your	captive	status.	You’re
clinging	 desperately	 to	 your	 lies;	 shielding	 them	 with	 emotional	 energy.	 Why?
Because	these	lies	are	you.	They	are	who	you	are.	You	don’t	have	imperfections,
you	are	imperfections.	Ask	yourself	why	you	even	write	to	me?	What’s	the	point?
None	of	what	I’m	saying	is	new	to	you.	And	yet	here	you	are,	writing	impassioned
letters	to	me,	trying	to	stand	your	lies	back	up	on	their	feet.	If	you	like	your	lies,
fine,	but	you’re	not	going	to	make	them	true	through	the	power	of	your	conviction.
Who	you	are	is	a	lie;	that’s	a	fact.	You’re	a	fictional	character	in	a	state	of	wondrous
denial.	What	you	think	of	as	your	uniqueness	is	really	nothing	more	than	a	series	of
randomly	set	toggle	switches,	and	the	particular	settings	you	call	“me”	amount	to
nothing	 more	 special	 than	 the	 distinctions	 between	 any	 two	 snowflakes	 in	 an
endless	blizzard.
	
A	serious	person	must	remember	at	all	times	where	he	is	and	who’s	running	the
show.	This	is	Maya’s	house.	She	controls	everything.	She	has	every	advantage.	We
are	patients	in	Maya’s	asylum,	and	all	instruction	to	sit	still	and	quiet	the	mind	come
directly	from	her.	Stillness	and	silence	are	the	antithesis	of	the	awakening	process,
and	those	who	advocate	peace	and	compassion	and	a	quiet	mind	are	just	reselling
their	preferred	sleep	potions.	There	are	even	popular	spiritual	teachers	and	authors
who	advocate	doing	nothing	at	all;	they	say	that	effort	itself	is	the	problem,	that	the
discontentment	that	drives	the	spiritual	pursuit	is	the	only	thing	standing	between
ourselves	and	the	goal	of	that	pursuit.	Is	it	any	wonder	that	such	a	message	would
be	popular?	Is	there	any	doubt	from	whom	such	a	message	really	comes?	You
indicate	in	your	letter	that	you	believe	a	teacher’s	lineage	is	important,	so	there’s	the
one	true	lineage;	Maya.	If	you	wish	to	understand	any	spiritual	teacher’s	lineage,
you	need	only	imagine	him	dangling	from	marionette	lines	of	which	he	is	unaware,
spouting	off	about	free	will,	the	hand	of	Maya	above,	controlling	everything.
	
Even	as	you	write	to	me	and	I	write	to	you,	we	are	dissolving	in	a	vat	of	a	corrosive
chemical	called	oxygen.	We	are	genetically	programmed	to	self-destruct.	Our	lives
are	being	swallowed	by	time	and	every	inhalation	may	be	the	last.	The	inescapable
fact	is	that	we	are	all	practitioners	of	the	New	Zen	I	described	above.	Every	day	we
lose	an	ounce	or	a	gram	or	a	pound	and	someday,	poof!,	gone	as	if	we	never	were.
	
There’s	only	one	koan	and	it’s	the	same	for	all	of	us:
	
What	is	true?
	
Yours,	&tc

=== Page 48 ===
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Mannahatta
	
I	was	asking	for	something	specific
and	perfect	for	my	city,
Whereupon,	lo!	upsprang	the	aboriginal	name!
	
Walt	Whitman,	Mannahatta
	
	
I	like	Manhattan
	too	much	to	ever	live	there.	The	most	I	ever	do	is	visit	for	a	few
months.	That’s	what	I’m	doing	now.	The	time	is	summer	‘01.	The	Twin	Towers	still
stand,	but	not	for	long.	The	first	book,	Spiritual	Enlightenment:	The	Damnedest
Thing,	is	written	but	not	yet	printed.
	
I’d	spent	the	last	few	months	house	and	dog	sitting	in	Puerto	Rico.	When	I	decided
to	go	to	the	city,	I	called	my	sister	who	lives	there	and	set	up	a	lunch.	As	it
happened,	she	said,	she	knew	of	a	three	month	availability	on	a	Tribeca	loft	if	I
needed	a	place.	She	told	me	that	her	friends	who	owned	it	were	desperate	to	find	a
tenant	because	their	arrangements	through	a	house-swapping	agency	had	fallen
through	at	the	last	minute,	but	they	were	going	on	their	trip	anyway.
	
“That’s	fine,”	I	told	her.	“I’ll	call	Rodney	and	ask	him	to	put	it	together.”
	
“You	don’t	want	to	see	it	first?”	she	asks.
	
“You’re	saying	it’s	okay,	right?”
	
“Yes,	but—”
	
“So	it’s	fine.	I’ll	see	you	for	lunch	next	week.”
	
That’s	a	clear	illustration	of	two	widely	disparate	modes	of	operating	in	the	world;
the	distrusting	way	of	the	segregated	self	and	the	trusting	way	of	the	integrated	self.
My	sister	would	have	had	to	inspect	the	apartment,	haggle	about	price,	maybe	call
in	experts	to	inspect	this	and	that,	find	alternatives	to	keep	her	options	open,	put

=== Page 49 ===
deposits	in	escrow	and	get	a	lawyer	to	sign	off	on	the	lease.	She	might	refer	to	the
owners	as	friends	but,	as	she	would	say,	business	is	business.	This	is	the	falsest	of
economies	because	the	only	thing	she’s	saving	is	money,	while	wasting	her	only
true	 wealth,	 her	 lifeforce,	 with	 all	 that	 dreadful	 fear-based	 strategizing	 and
maneuvering.	It’s	not	really	about	money,	of	course,	it’s	about	self-image.
	
That’s	not	just	how	she’d	lease	an	apartment,	that’s	how	she	does	pretty	much
everything.	She	lives	in	a	universe	where	a	hundred	bad	things	could	happen	in
every	situation.	Her	state	is	one	of	constant	vigilance.	She	spends	her	life	imagining
everything	that	could	go	wrong	and	making	sure	that	it	doesn’t.	To	her,	the	universe
is	a	hostile	place	in	which,	though	she’d	never	phrase	it	this	way,	she	does	not
belong	and	has	no	rights	or	power.	And	yet,	most	anyone	would	consider	my	sister
a	bright,	attractive	and	very	successful	woman.	What	I’ve	just	said	about	her	is	just
as	true	of	many	other	people	and	more	so	of	most.	This	mode	of	operation	appears
like	a	systemic	malignancy	to	me—cancer	of	the	life—but	probably	seems	normal
and	acceptable	to	most	people.	It’s	not	a	starkly	pronounced	fear,	it’s	more	a	damp
sort	of	dread	that	seeps	outward	from	the	center	into	every	corner	of	one’s	being.
When	you’re	living	with	it,	it	just	seems	normal.	Once	free	of	it,	you	can’t	believe
you	ever	lived	like	that.
	
To	me,	it’s	the	simplest	thing	in	the	world.	I’m	going	to	the	city	so	I	pick	up	a	phone
and	find	a	place	to	stay	before	I	even	thought	about	finding	a	place	to	stay.	I	get
what	I	want	before	I	know	I	want	it,	and	better	than	I	would	have	thought	to	want.	I
never	take	this	sort	of	effortless	functioning	for	granted	and	I’m	permeated	with
deep	and	genuine	gratitude	many	times	a	day.	I’ve	arrived	at	this	place	of	smooth
flow	mainly	by	being	respectful,	by	watching	how	things	work,	and	by	keeping	my
fearful	little	reptile	brain	out	of	the	equation.	I	don’t	have	much	in	the	way	of
distorting	mental	or	emotional	baggage	that	I	haul	around	with	me,	so	I	guess	that
allows	everything	to	work	as	it’s	supposed	to;	smooth	and	easy.
	
Does	all	this	make	me	a	sucker?	A	soft	touch?	Not	really.	Should	the	deal	go	bad,	or
the	lessors	try	to	hold	my	deposits	unjustly,	or	any	of	the	many	things	that	can	go
wrong	in	this	type	of	arrangement	do	go	wrong,	then	I’d	just	make	another	phone
call.	I’d	set	a	pitbull	lawyer	on	them	with	instructions	to	cause	regret.	Or	maybe	I’d
just	shrug	and	blow	it	off.	I	never	know	how	I’ll	act	until	I	do	because	I	don’t	have
any	rules	or	guidelines	that	tell	me	how	to	behave,	or	maybe	just	one:	Patience.
Breathe.	Give	it	time.	Allow	things	to	settle	out	and	for	patterns	to	become	clear.
	
The	point	I’m	trying	to	make	is	that	I’m	not	necessarily	a	sweetheart	of	a	guy.	I
could	be	a	total	prick,	at	least	in	theory,	but	I	must	say,	there	doesn’t	seem	to	be

=== Page 50 ===
much	call	for	it.	I	don’t	think	about	things	like	this—deals	going	sour,	people
betraying	 people,	 pitbull	 lawyers—and	 they	 really	 never	 occur	 in	 my	 reality.
There’d	be	no	point	because	there’s	nothing	in	it	for	me	to	learn.	So	when	I	make	a
call	and	my	sister	tells	me	she	knows	of	a	place,	I	already	know	all	about	it.	I	know
it	will	be	ideal,	that	the	owners	will	be	easy	to	deal	with,	that	it	will	be	in	a	better
area	than	I	would	have	chosen,	and	that	all	sorts	of	other	good	things	will	come	of
it,	not	because	I	orchestrated	it	with	my	snazzy	little	brain,	but	because	I	didn’t.
And	if	it	appears	to	line	up	nicely	and	then	falls	through,	then	I	won’t	suspect	that
something	didn’t	work,	but	that	something	bigger	and	better	is	at	work.
	
I	have	no	rule	that	makes	me	a	nice	guy.	I	have	no	rules.	Rules	are	a	way	we	have	of
defining	ourselves,	of	drawing	imaginary	boundaries.	Such	boundaries	are	artificial
and	easily	erased.	Our	most	strongly	held	convictions	can	be	wiped	away	like	a
layer	of	make-up	through	a	moment	of	transcendence	or	cataclysm,	or	merely	by	a
slight	shift	in	brain	chemistry.	Morals,	ethics,	I	have	none.	As	it	happens,	I’m	a	nice
guy.	 If	 it	 happens	 another	 way,	 I’ll	 be	 another	 kind	 of	 guy.	 I	 could	 make	 the
impassioned	assertion	that	I’d	never,	under	any	circumstances,	cause	anyone	harm,
but	events	might	change	and	for	some	reason	I’ll	have	to	push	some	kids	in	front	of
a	train	this	afternoon.	I	doubt	it	and	I	hope	not,	but	maybe.	Yes,	it’s	unimaginable,
but	that	doesn’t	make	it	impossible.	Unimaginable	stuff	happens	all	the	time.
	
I	have	a	way	of	operating	in	the	world	and	it	has	nothing	to	do	with	rules;	not	mine
or	anyone	else’s.	It	has	to	do	with	trust	and	patterns	and	the	absence	of	artificial
boundaries.	If	those	poor	little	children	need	to	be	pushed	in	front	of	that	speeding
locomotive,	and	that	fact	becomes	clear	to	me	in	the	way	that	things	becomes	clear
to	me,	then	we’re	gonna	need	a	clean-up	crew	with	strong	stomachs	and	a	lot	of
little	bags.
	
You’d	think	that	I	could	say	with	certainty	that	nothing	so	terrible	could	ever	come
to	pass,	and	I’d	certainly	bet	heavily	against	it,	but	it’s	not	a	sure	thing.	Terrible
things	do	come	to	pass.	An	objective	observer	of	humanity	might	say	that	terrible
things	 are	 closer	 to	 the	 norm	 than	 big,	 happy	 things.	 Why	 pretend	 otherwise?
Suffering	and	horror	are	part	of	life	in	the	dreamstate,	a	big	part.	No,	I	don’t	really
think	that	the	universe	will	have	me	push	children	in	front	of	a	train	this	afternoon.
That	lets	me	off	the	hook,	but	not	the	children.	The	universe	probably	won’t	use	my
hands	for	it,	but	it	will	still	push	those	children	in	front	of	that	train.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	

=== Page 51 ===
I	wouldn’t	suggest	that	just	anyone	can	attain	to	supreme	mastery	in	the	art	and
science	of	manifesting	desires—I	know	I	haven’t—but	I	would	suggest	that	most
anyone,	 whatever	 their	 circumstances,	 has	 plenty	 of	 room	 for	 improvement.	 I
understand	that	there	are	influencing	factors;	gender,	race,	place,	wealth,	health,
karma,	dharma,	luck	and	others	that	can	play	a	crucial	role	in	the	degree	to	which
any	individual	might	realistically	hope	to	elevate,	redefine,	or	undefine	themselves,
but	I	also	understand	that	most	people	are	carrying	around	a	lot	of	crappy	crap	they
don’t	need	and	which	serves	only	to	limit	their	potential	for	expansion.
	
Some	people	dabble	with	this	sort	of	wishcraft	and	reject	it	when	it	doesn’t	work	for
them.	They	wish	for	a	million	dollars	or	something	equally	juvenile,	and	when	it
doesn’t	appear	they	write	the	whole	subject	off	as,	well,	wishful	thinking.	There’s
right-wanting	and	there’s	fear-wanting	and	a	million	dollars	is	fear-wanting.	Right-
wanting	is	genuine	and	represents	a	true	unfolding	of	one’s	unique	pattern.	This	is
no	 small	 point.	 Discovering	 right-wanting	 within	 yourself	 is	 the	 journey	 of
unbecoming	who	you	aren’t.
	
Another	point	I	have	to	make	before	I	move	on	is	that	nothing	I	talk	about,	whether
it’s	truth-realization	or	our	true	relationship	with	the	universe,	is	anything	other	than
that	which	is	naturally,	rightfully,	immutably	ours.	This	isn’t	stuff	we	have	to	go	out
and	learn	or	earn	or	fight	for,	it’s	simply	what	is.	The	Zen	master	who	wrote	as	his
own	epitaph,	“All	my	life	I	have	sold	water	by	the	river.	Ha!	What	a	joke!”	was
addressing	exactly	this	point.	This	is	natural.	This	is	what	is.	Reality	is	beyond	our
wildest	dreams	and	it	can	all	be	yours	because	it	already	is.	The	only	thing	in	the
way	is	you.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
So	I	took	the	apartment	for	three	months	with	the	intention	of	wallowing	in	high
culture	 for	 awhile;	 theater,	 museums,	 libraries,	 good	 restaurants.	 I’m	 very
comfortable	doing	all	these	things	alone.	It	wasn’t	actually	working	out	as	planned,
but	other,	better	things	were	working	out	very	nicely	so	I	was	happy	enough.	This
was	 a	 few	 months	 before	 the	 World	 Trade	 Center	 was	 attacked,	 so	 pre-9-11
normalcy	still	existed.	The	apartment	was	actually	a	renovated	warehouse	space;
lots	of	sand-blasted	brick,	rusty	iron	and	big	timber.	Very	large	and	airy	inside	with
walled	off	bedrooms	and	bathrooms	and	everything	else—kitchen,	dining	room,
formal	and	informal	living	areas—open.	A	circular	stairway	led	up	to	a	railed	upper
level	at	one	end	where	the	owners	kept	books	and	a	small	home	office.	Not	much	of
a	view	from	the	big	industrial	windows,	and	it	was	furnished	with	more	of	an	eye
toward	style	than	comfort	for	my	tastes,	but	still	a	very	nice	living	space.

=== Page 52 ===
	
Around	this	time	I	received	an	e-mail	from	Jolene	who	had	by	now	seen	herself
portrayed	in	a	pre-publication	copy	of	Damnedest.	She	wanted	to	see	me,	to	speak
with	me.	She	had	enough	money	saved	up	to	make	the	trip	and	wanted	to	come	for
a	few	days	even,	she	said,	if	she	could	only	spend	a	few	minutes	with	me.	I	replied
with	a	suggestion	that	she	buy	a	backpack	and	a	Eurail	Pass	and	go	spend	the
summer	bumming	around	Europe	instead.	She	liked	that	idea	and	said	she’d	try	to
do	it,	but	would	still	like	to	see	me	first.
	
I	agreed	and	after	a	few	e-mails	back	and	forth	her	plans	start	taking	shape.	A	week
or	so	before	her	visit	she	called	to	tell	me	her	flight	number	and	arrival	time,	but	she
hasn’t	found	a	place	to	stay	yet.	Without	thinking,	I	told	her	that	the	loft	has	plenty
of	room	and	she	should	stay	there	while	she’s	in	town.
	
“Really?”	she	said.	“Great!”
	
A	split	second	later	my	mind	caught	up	with	my	mouth.
	
“Hold	on	a	second,”	I	tell	her.	I	cover	the	mouthpiece	with	one	hand	and	rub	my
temple	in	a	slow,	circular,	what-the-fuck-did-I-just-do?	motion	with	the	other.
	
“I	have	to	speak	with	your	father,”	I	tell	her.	“Is	he	there?”
	
“Yeah,”	she	says	hesitantly.
	
“You’ve	been	upfront	about	this	trip?	Nothing	tricky?”
	
“No,	they	know	what	I’m	doing.”
	
“Okay,	put	your	father	on.”
	
“Okay,”	she	says	nervously,	“but	don’t	tell	him,	you	know,	don’t	tell	him	anything
important.”
	
“I	understand.	Put	him	on.”
	
After	a	few	moments	her	father	comes	on	the	line.	I	introduce	myself	and	we	speak
in	a	respectful	Mr.	Lastname	manner.	He	has	some	idea	of	who	I	am.	“Jo-Jo	talks
about	you	often	enough,	Mr.	McKenna,”	he	says,	not	sounding	very	pleased	about
it.	I	tell	him	that	I	thought	it	was	a	good	idea	for	him	and	me	to	speak	so	I	could

=== Page 53 ===
introduce	myself	and	assure	him	that	I’d	keep	an	eye	on	his	daughter	while	she	was
in	the	city.	I	was	painfully	aware	that	everything	I	said	sounded	wrong,	like	a	guilty
person	trying	to	sound	innocent,	but	there	was	no	help	for	it.
	
Of	course,	talking	to	her	father	was	not	strictly	necessary.	Jolene	was	old	enough	to
do	what	she	wanted,	but	that	wasn’t	the	point.	The	point	was	to	head	off	a	mess
before	it	became	one.	I	was	actually	somewhat	grateful	for	the	error	that	prompted
me	to	speak	with	him	though,	because	I	now	realized	it’s	something	I	should	have
done	anyway	and	hadn’t	thought	of.	He	seemed	somewhat	pleased	to	hear	from	me,
but	was	still	guarded.	Maybe	he	was	a	bit	relieved	to	find	that	this	character	who
had	 lured	 his	 daughter	 into	 some	 crazy	 cult	 thing	 sounded	 fairly	 sane	 and
responsible.	Just	a	guess.
	
“Jolene	and	I	were	speaking	just	now	and	I’m	afraid	I	made	a	bit	of	mistake.”
	
In	reply	he	just	hmph’d.
	
“I	offered	to	let	Jolene	stay	with	me	while	she’s	in	town.	I	have	plenty	of	room	here
and	it	seemed	like	the	safest	and	most	sensible	thing,	but,	of	course,	I	immediately
realized	it	might	look,	well,	a	bit	inappropriate.	I	thought	I	should	discuss	it	with
you.”
	
There	was	another	low	sound	from	the	other	end	of	the	phone,	but	I	wanted	to	finish
saying	my	part	before	he	started	on	his	so	I	plowed	on.	Of	course,	it	would	have
been	easier	to	simply	withdraw	the	initial	offer	but,	appearances	aside,	it’s	really
much	for	the	best	that	Jolene	stays	with	me	and,	after	a	moment’s	consideration,	I
realized	that	the	only	real	concern	appearance-wise	was	her	parents.	I	have	no
reputation	to	protect,	or	if	I	do	it	could	probably	use	some	spicing	up	anyway.
Jolene’s	reputation	should	be	safe	because	she’s	not	a	big-mouth	and	because	no
one	who	knows	her	would	believe	anything	raunchy	about	her	anyway.
	
“This	situation	is	exactly	what	I’m	sure	Jolene	has	told	you	it	is.	There’s	nothing,
uh,”	I	grope	for	a	word	and	end	up	using	a	dumb	one,	“romantic	in	all	this.	In	any
case,	I	shouldn’t	have	made	the	offer	and	I’ll	certainly	respect	whatever	your	wishes
might	be	on	the	matter.”	He	doesn’t	jump	in	so	I	continue,	wondering	how	I	got
myself	into	such	a	dimwitted	mess.	“I	could	help	her	find	a	hotel	or	a	nice	hostel,	or
maybe	she	could	be	accompanied	by	a	family	member	who	could	also	stay	in	my
place.	Whatever—”
	
Now	he	speaks.

=== Page 54 ===
	
“Are	you	asking	me—?”
	
I	cut	him	off.	I	know	exactly	what	he	means	because	that’s	how	this	whole	thing
sounds	to	me	too,	like	a	veiled	petition	to	court	his	daughter,	or	to	secure	his
blessing	for	something	weird.	I	roll	my	eyes	and	plod	on.
	
“I’m	just	telling	you	the	situation.	Whatever	you	say	is	how	it’ll	be.	I	made	this
offer	to	your	daughter	in	the	spirit	of	friendship	and	concern.	It’s	a	very	large
apartment	I	have	here	and	the	city	can	be	a	tricky	place.”
	
Dumb.	Just	plain	dumb	across	the	board.	But	that’s	the	situation	so	I	don’t	kick
myself	too	hard.	We	talk	a	bit	more.	He	gives	it	a	bit	of	thought	and	decides	I	sound
okay,	and	that	his	daughter	has	some	funny	ideas	but	she’s	a	good	kid,	and	if	we’re
going	to	do	anything	inappropriate	it	probably	wouldn’t	matter	what	he	thought	of
the	living	arrangements	anyway,	and	that	it	would	be	easier	for	him	and	his	wife	to
know	that	Jo-Jo	wouldn’t	be	completely	on	her	own	in	the	city.	My	sense	of	it,
though,	is	that	he	isn’t	so	much	concerned	about	these	housing	arrangements	as	he
is	of	the	larger	issue	of	his	daughter	becoming	a	stranger,	and	of	me	as	the	guy	who
might	have	caused	it.	He	thanks	me,	a	bit	halfheartedly,	and	we	leave	it	at	that.
	
Ack.
	
	
The	Journey	to	the	Shaman
	
I	could	have	met	her	at	the	airport,	or	I	could	have	sent	a	car	and	had	the	driver
waiting	for	her,	holding	up	a	sign	with	her	name.	That	probably	would	have	given
her	a	thrill.	The	thing	though,	and	this	is	an	important	thing,	is	that	the	journey	to
the	shaman	is	as	much	a	part	of	the	shamanic	experience	as	the	visit	with	him.	I’m
not	a	shaman,	of	course,	but	the	adage	fully	applies.	This	kid	has	gone	through
whatever	it	takes	a	young	farmgirl	from	the	cornbelt	to	track	me	down,	scrape	up
cash,	break	away	from	family	and	home,	and	get	on	a	plane	to	one	of	the	world’s
most	intimidating	urban	centers;	in	short,	to	embark	on	a	great	journey.	An	itch	in
her	head	must	have	grown	into	a	torment	to	necessitate	such	a	journey	and	I’m	not
about	to	diminish	that	by	hauling	her	up	the	last	few	feet.	My	part	starts	with
buzzing	her	in.
	
It’s	not	supposed	to	be	easy.
	

=== Page 55 ===
I	return	from	an	arthouse	showing	of	The	Winter	Guest	to	find	her	asleep,	using	her
backpack	as	a	pillow,	at	the	elevator	gate.	I	don’t	want	to	wake	her	and	I	can’t	go
past	her	without	making	a	racket,	but	I	also	don’t	want	to	stand	out	here	watching	a
string	of	saliva	trickle	down	the	zipper	of	a	side	pocket.	The	dilemma	resolves	itself
when	she	peeks	out	of	one	eye	and	then	the	other.
	
“Oh!	Hi!”	she	screeches	and	jumps	up	and	wipes	her	lips	and	wraps	me	in	a	hug,
“Hi,	hi,	hi,	hi,	hi!”
	
I	hi	back	and	break	away	and	ask	with	avuncular	concern	if	she	made	it	in	one
piece,	which	I	can	see	she	has.
	
We	get	her	settled	into	the	extra	bedroom.	I	give	her	the	spare	set	of	keys	and	we	go
for	a	walk	around	the	neighborhood.	We	find	a	nice	Mediterranean	place	for	dinner
and	discuss	her	plans	over	olives,	feta,	lamb	and	rice.	We	don’t	get	into	anything
she	refers	to	as	important.	There’ll	be	time	for	that	and	she	has	other	things	she
wants	to	do	while	she’s	here,	which	we	also	don’t	get	into	too	much,	but	I	can	tell
she’s	going	to	do	some	looking	around.	She’s	happy	and	upbeat	on	the	outside	but
beneath	that	even	an	unastute	human	observer	like	myself	can	see	she’s	got	serious
matters	on	her	mind.	I	particularly	enjoy	being	with	people	in	this	state	of	mind
because	it	means	they’re	dealing	with	serious	issues,	but	there’s	no	rush	about
anything	so	I	keep	the	conversation	light	and	cheerful	and	try	to	help	her	relax.
	
	
Kill	the	Swiss
	
The	next	morning	she’s	up	late.	I	know	she	brought	a	bunch	of	books	and	a	folder
of	internet	printouts	and	that	she’s	working	at	reading	and	writing	to	get	herself	to
some	resolution	so	that	probably	kept	her	up	into	the	small	hours.	I	get	her	seated	at
the	raised	breakfast	bar	that’s	a	part	of	the	kitchen’s	island	counter,	pour	her	some
juice	and	get	started	cooking	her	an	omelet.
	
As	we	animate	these	householder	characters	and	inhabit	this	scene	of	domestic
routine,	she	begins	to	talk	about	“important”	stuff.	She	starts	sharing	her	views	on
Buddhism	with	me.	After	a	few	minutes	of	listening	to	her	it	becomes	clear	that
she’s	trying	to	sell	herself	on	Buddhism	by	trying	to	sell	it	to	me.	It’s	also	clear
from	the	eagerness	with	which	she’s	trying	to	sell	it	that	she	has	reservations	that
have	not	yet	resolved	themselves	into	focus	for	her.	She	talks	to	me	in	a	way	that
suggests	that	she’s	really	trying	to	convince	herself	of	something	she	knows	better

=== Page 56 ===
than	 to	 believe.	 That’s	 how	 desperation	 works;	 the	 frightened	 heart	 seeks	 to
overrule	the	doubting	mind.	Fear	overshadows	reason	and	gives	rise	to	faith.
	
I	don’t	say	anything.	I	finish	her	omelet	and	put	it	in	front	of	her	and	allow	her	to	go
on.	She	started	out	with	a	life-is-suffering	thing	but	that’s	hard	to	pull	off	if	you’ve
never	missed	a	meal	or	had	a	physical	ailment	more	grievous	than	a	zit.	She	then
edged	briefly	into	some	bodhisattva	thing	about	not	resting	until	all	sentient	beings
are	liberated	which	made	us	both	grimace	a	bit,	then	a	few	words	in	praise	of
mindfulness	and	tranquility,	and	now	she’s	talking	about	compassion.	I	could	tell
her	that	compassion	is	just	another	way	of	keeping	our	attention	turned	safely
outward	rather	than	destructively	inward,	but	if	I	don’t	interrupt	I’m	confident	that
she’ll	hear	the	same	discordant	note	in	her	words	that	I	hear	and	talk	herself	out	of
whatever	she’s	trying	to	talk	herself	into.	She	might	need	me	to	listen	to	this,	but
she	doesn’t	need	me	to	respond.	She’s	entering	Buddhism	along	a	circular	drive,
and	 if	 I	 don’t	 interrupt	 her	 process	 she’ll	 soon	 be	 back	 out	 on	 the	 road,
disappointed,	but	ready	to	continue	the	journey.
	
She	winds	down	and	picks	at	her	omelet.
	
“Jolene,	pretend	there’s	a	big	red	button	on	the	counter,	okay?”
	
“Okay,”	she	says,	perked	up	by	a	new	game.
	
“If	you	press	it,	you	kill	everyone	in	Switzerland.”
	
She	gives	me	her	reserved,	lip-biting	smile.
	
“Okay,”	she	says	warily.
	
“If	you	press	it,	no	one	will	ever	know.	You’ll	never	be	blamed	or	connected	to	the
deaths	of	all	those	millions	of	nice	Swiss	people.”
	
“Yeah?”	she	says.	“So?”
	
“So	why	not	press	it?”
	
She	brightens	and	begins	to	answer	immediately,	then	darkens	and	bites	down	on
her	bottom	lip	to	hold	the	answer	in.	This	is	like	one	of	those	goofy	morality
questions	they	ask	you	in	the	seventh	grade,	like	would	you	turn	in	a	friend	for

=== Page 57 ===
shoplifting,	except	I’m	not	trying	to	teach	her	morality,	I’m	trying	to	help	her	get
past	it.
	
She’s	looking	for	a	safe	haven	and	she	hopes	she’s	found	it	in	Buddhism,	but	some
part	of	her	knows	she	hasn’t.	Here’s	the	thing	they	don’t	tell	you	about	compassion,
maybe	because	they	don’t	know:	Compassion	has	nothing	to	do	with	awakening.
It’s	unrelated.	It	sounds	good	and	it’s	a	tough	thing	to	take	a	stand	against,	but	it’s	a
total	 disconnect.	 The	 Golden	 Rule	 of	 Compassionism	 is	 Do	 Unto	 Others.	 The
Golden	Rule	of	Awakism	is	Think	For	Yourself.	There	is	no	such	thing	as	a	Buddha
of	Compassion.	If	you’re	compassionate	prior	to	awakening,	that	impulse	indicates
an	area	where	something	false	needs	to	be	hacked	away.	If	you’re	compassionate
after	awakening,	you’re	not	awake.	If	you’re	holding	out	for	the	awakened	state	that
includes	compassion,	maybe	you’ll	find	Buddhism	a	comfortable	place	to	kill	the
time.
	
I	watch	Jolene.	I	don’t	know	much	about	human	beings,	but	I	can	see	what’s	going
on	in	her	head.	The	first	thing	she	realized	is	that	this	question	has	something	to	do
with	what	she	came	here	for,	even	though	she	hasn’t	told	me	what	that	is	yet	and
she	 may	 not	 be	 sure	 herself.	 Next,	 she	 started	 mentally	 scrolling	 through	 the
obvious	answers—they’re	innocent	people,	it’s	just	plain	wrong,	I’ll	roast	in	hell,
etc—without	settling	on	one.	After	that	she	would	have	looked	for	less	obvious
answers—karmic	imbalance,	European	destabilization,	leaving	the	Alps	unattended
—found	none,	and	is	now,	or	I	miss	my	guess,	revisiting	the	obvious	ones.	She
looks	 very	 frustrated	 at	 her	 inability	 to	 provide	 a	 simple	 answer	 to	 a	 simple
question.
	
The	reason	for	picking	on	Buddhism	is	to	better	understand	Maya.	It’s	her	thing.	We
all	buy	into	the	notion	that	in	order	to	awaken	an	intermediary	is	required,	an
intercessor,	but	the	only	intercessor	is	Maya.	Kill	the	intercessor.	Kill	the	teacher.
Kill	the	Buddha.	DIY.	You	have	eyes,	you	have	a	brain,	do	the	math,	look	for
yourself.	This	isn’t	one	way,	it’s	the	only	way.	That’s	why	I’ve	taken	measures	to
make	sure	no	one	can	glom	onto	me,	to	appoint	me	their	personal	savior,	to	wedge
me	in	between	themselves	and	reality.	That’s	our	natural	tendency	in	these	perilous
waters;	 to	 reach	 out,	 to	 grab	 something,	 to	 attach,	 to	 put	 something	 between
ourselves	and	the	threat	of	eternal	nothingness	that	lurks	just	beneath	the	surface.
We	want	to	maintain	the	illusion	that	we	are	not	completely	alone	on	an	infinite	sea
but,	of	course,	that’s	exactly	what	we	are.
	
And	there	ain’t	no	we	about	it.
	

=== Page 58 ===
“I’d	 feel	 terrible,”	 Jolene	 says	 at	 last,	 making	 it	 more	 of	 a	 question	 than	 an
assertion.	 I	 give	 her	 the	 mean	 look	 and	 she	 squirms	 and	 goes	 back	 to	 work.
Whatever	she	answers,	I’ll	give	her	the	mean	look.	I	don’t	want	her	to	answer	it,	I
just	want	her	to	think	about	it.	I	want	her	to	take	a	hard	look	at	obvious	answers.
What	could	be	more	obvious	than	the	reason	for	not	pushing	a	button	and	killing
millions	of	innocent	people?
	
And	yet—
	
“Why	should	I	press	it?”	Jolene	asks.	“Maybe	that’s	the	better	question.	I	don’t	need
a	reason	not	to	press	it	since	I	don’t	have	any	reason	to	press	it.	I’ll	just	go	on	as	if
there’s	no	button.	Or	maybe	there’s	no	reason	not	to	press	it.	Is	that	what	you’re
saying?	Fuck	it.	I	press	the	button,	right?”
	
“Those	are	evasions,”	I	reply.	“Neither	of	those	are	the	answers	to	the	question.	The
question	is	why	not	press	it.”
	
“I	don’t	know,”	she	says.	“Why	not?”
	
“Hell	if	I	know.”
	
She	slams	her	fist	down	on	the	imaginary	button	and	gives	me	a	mischievous	smile
like	she	might	have	just	done	something	terribly	naughty.
	
“Oh	well,”	I	say	ruefully,	“there	goes	yodeling.”
	
“Never	cared	for	it,”	she	says	through	a	big,	toothy	grin.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
After	a	few	days	we’ve	settled	into	a	routine	and	see	each	other	only	in	passing	and
for	one	or	two	meals	a	day,	usually	out,	usually	a	walk	or	short	cab	ride	away.
Jolene	has	been	doing	a	lot	more	with	her	time	here	than	just	hanging	out	with
unhip	 old	 me;	 she’s	 been	 getting	 out	 and	 networking.	 Once	 she	 had	 her
arrangements	in	place	to	be	here	for	a	week	she	started	using	the	internet	to	figure
out	where	she	wanted	to	go	including	some	temples,	some	Eastern	and	New	Age
book	shops,	and	at	least	one	mystical	coffee	shop.	She	branched	out	from	those
starting	points.	She’s	talked	to	people	and	followed	leads.	She	hasn’t	made	much
headway	with	the	subway	so	she’s	throwing	a	lot	of	money	at	cabs	and	zigzagging
around	the	city	and	borough-hopping	rather	haphazardly	and	surely	expensively.

=== Page 59 ===
	
She	hasn’t	kept	me	updated	on	her	activities,	but	I	can	imagine.	If	she’s	been
visiting	temples	and	speaking	with	monks	or	nuns,	they	might	have	treated	her	like
a	cute	little	tourist	girl	visiting	the	big	city	from	the	farmbelt	for	about	half	a
howdy-do,	but	then	they	would	have	found	something	unexpected.	They	would
have	found	that	cute	little	ninety-eight	pound	Jolene	has	the	hunger.	She	doesn’t
want	the	tour	and	she	doesn’t	want	the	brochure.	She	wants	very	specific	answers	to
very	specific	questions.	If	she	can’t	get	them	to	come	out	of	the	gentle	monk’s
mouth,	she’ll	crawl	into	his	brain	with	a	flashlight	and	a	pickaxe	to	see	if	they’re	in
there.	 If	 she	 doesn’t	 find	 what	 she’s	 looking	 for,	 the	 monk	 will	 become	 as
disposable	as	a	gum	wrapper.	I	know	all	this	because	I	know	the	hunger	and	I	know
that	it’s	growing	inside	Jolene.	She’s	not	looking	for	new	friends,	she’s	not	looking
for	general	knowledge	or	pleasant	experiences.	She’s	getting	into	a	very	serious
frame	of	mind	and	her	appetites	are	getting	very	powerful	and	very	specific.	I	don’t
mean	to	get	another	vampire	thing	going	here,	but	it’s	a	wickedly	good	analogy.
	
	
Improbability
	
After	she’s	been	around	for	a	few	days	I	ask	what	she’s	been	eating	during	her
forays	into	the	spiritual	side	of	the	city.	She	answers,	not	surprisingly,	not	much.
She	grabs	a	coffee	and	a	pastry	when	she	can,	maybe	a	salad	now	and	then.	The
idea	of	someone	visiting	New	York	and	not	experiencing	a	proper	deli	is	unbearable
so	I	ask	her	to	pencil	me	in	for	lunch	today	and	off	we	go.
	
As	we	entered	the	narrow	deli	we	got	squeezed	in	behind	a	woman	of	about	sixty;
short,	stout,	and	severe.	Just	inside	the	door	she	dropped	her	leather	binder	on	the
floor.	I	couldn’t	get	around	her	to	be	a	gentleman	and	pick	it	up	for	her,	so	we	had
nowhere	to	go	until	she	retrieved	it	and	moved	on.	What	spilled	out	of	her	binder
was	unmistakably	a	copy	of	Damnedest	with	the	black	and	white	cover	of	the	pre-
publication	review	copies,	all	marked	up,	bulging	with	post-it	notes,	and	held	closed
with	rubber	bands.	Jolene	saw	it	as	clearly	as	I	did.
	
We	entered	the	deli.	The	woman	took	a	number	and	waited	to	be	served.	I	motioned
to	Jolene	and	we	turned	around	and	left.	As	we	walked	I	knew	Jolene	was	watching
me	with	a	big	drop-jawed	grin	on	her	face,	but	I	wasn’t	ready	to	deal	with	her
amazement	yet,	I	was	still	dealing	with	my	own.
	
This	was	way	beyond	too	much.	What	are	the	odds?	Too	astronomical	to	compute.
There	are	only	like	fifty	of	these	pre-pub	copies	in	existence.	What	are	the	chances

=== Page 60 ===
that	I’ll	be	in	New	York,	entering	some	deli	behind	some	woman	in	such	a	way	that
I	can’t	get	by,	just	as	she	drops	her	binder	and	spills	out	a	copy	of	a	book	I’d	just
finished	writing,	face	up	so	I	could	see	what	it	was?	No	chance.	The	whole	thing
was	so	far	outside	the	realm	of	possibility	that	my	first	impulse	was	to	look	around
for	the	hidden	cameras	of	some	TV	stunt.
	
I	am	pretty	well	attuned	to	the	subtle	nuances	of	the	universe.	It’s	through	this
carefully	developed	sense	that	I	relate	to	the	world	with	an	unerring	ease	and
confidence.	 This	 thing	 with	 the	 proof	 copy,	 however,	 had	 nothing	 to	 do	 with
nuance.	This	was	a	deafening	gong,	nothing	subtle	about	it,	but	indicating	what?
For	what	purpose?	I	had	absolutely	no	idea.	It	was	just	this	huge,	astounding	non-
thing.	This	event	was	so	fantastically	unlikely	that	I	might	have	doubted	my	own
memory	afterward	had	not	Jolene	seen	it	as	clearly	as	I.
	
(Perhaps	that	woman	will	someday	read	this	and	remember	dropping	the	book	as
she	entered	a	deli	and	find	out	now	that	the	author	of	the	book	was	standing	inches
behind	her.	What	will	she	make	of	that?)
	
My	mind	scurried	to	get	a	handle	on	this,	but	couldn’t.	What’s	the	point	of	such	a
bizarre	occurrence?	What	am	I	to	make	of	it?	Has	the	universe	simply	abandoned
all	 restraint?	 It’s	 so	 utterly,	 preposterously,	 incalculably	 unlikely	 that	 the	 only
conclusion	you	can	come	to	is	that,	once	you	get	to	know	it	a	little	bit,	the	universe
is	really	just	a	big,	playful	puppy.
	
I	might	interpret	it	to	mean	that	the	universe	is	telling	me	we’re	headed	into	a	whole
new	way	of	functioning	wherein	nothing	is	too	much,	nothing	too	absurd	or	too
fantastic.	Maybe	the	dream	metaphor	is	no	metaphor	at	all.	Or	maybe	the	universe
is	telling	me	that	the	book	was	out	there	now,	that	it’s	a	living	thing	with	its	own
course	 to	 follow,	 its	 own	 destiny.	 Too	 much?	 Not	 enough?	 None	 of	 these
explanations	feel	right,	but	I	can’t	tell.	Maybe	the	dream	is	unraveling	right	before
my	eyes.	That	would	be	redundant	and	I’d	mildly	rather	it	didn’t,	but	who	knows.
Maybe	the	universe,	for	its	own	reasons,	wanted	me	to	write	about	this	experience,
to	 play	 with	 these	 conclusions	 in	 print.	 Maybe	 it	 happened	 so	 I	 could	 say	 it
happened,	so	someone	could	learn	something	by	reading	about	it,	get	their	next
door	opened.	Maybe	it	was,	somehow,	for	Jolene.	I	really	have	no	idea.	Fortunately,
I	don’t	feel	the	need	to	understand	everything.	Most	things	make	themselves	clear
in	time,	but	there’s	nothing	in	me	that	suggests	that	if	something	doesn’t	make	sense
to	me,	it	must	not	make	sense.	Everything	makes	sense.	In	the	few	years	since	this
incident	I’ve	had	a	dozen	other	similar	probability-defying	experiences,	and	the
explanation	I’ve	settled	on	is	the	big,	playful	puppy	theory.

=== Page 61 ===
	
	
My	Uncle	the	Vampire
	
I’m	laying	on	an	armless	leather	couch	trying	to	establish	a	deeper	rapport	with
Mozart’s	Requiem	which	is	being	played	on	DVD	by	full	symphony	orchestra	on
the	TV	and	filling	the	room	from	the	surround-sound	speaker	system.	I	have	a	ticket
for	a	performance	of	Requiem	in	a	few	weeks,	and	I	don’t	like	to	go	to	these	things
cold.	I	have	the	DVD,	a	CD,	and	some	books	to	help	me	out	so	that	when	I	attend
the	 actual	 performance	 I’ll	 have	 at	 least	 a	 basic	 familiarity	 with	 what’s	 being
expressed,	by	who,	and	why,	and	this	will	allow	me	to	relax	and	appreciate	the
experience	rather	than	waste	it	by	staying	in	my	head	the	whole	time.	I’m	a	little
familiar	with	the	Requiem	but	I’m	not	a	real	classical	music	buff,	so	it’s	this	added
dimension	that	makes	the	whole	thing	so	enjoyable.
	
Mozart	died	before	finishing	the	Requiem	and	there	are	several	versions	of	the
completed	work;	the	DVD	I	have	is	the	Levin	version	and	I	have	a	CD	of	the
Maunder	version,	but	the	performance	will	be	the	Süssmayr	version,	so	it’s	an
interesting	adventure	in	appreciation.	Or	so	I’d	hoped.	As	it	turned	out,	I	only
muddied	the	whole	thing	for	myself;	I	should	have	gone	deep	into	one	instead	of
shallow	into	three.	Nevertheless,	it	was	an	interesting	endeavor	and	still	is.	I	kept	at
it	and	I	now	have	a	much	better	understanding	of	the	piece	and	of	the	attempts	to
finish	it,	and	I	now	have	a	preference	for	the	Levin	version	from	a	more	informed
perspective.
	
I	bore	you	with	all	this	to	explain	what	I	mean	when	I	say	I	went	to	NYC	to	wallow
in	the	arts	for	awhile.	I	don’t	race	through	museums,	see	every	play	and	concert	and
snarf	 down	 expensive	 meals.	 On	 this	 particular	 trip	 I	 put	 my	 attention	 on	 the
Requiem,	two	plays,	a	dozen	or	so	restaurants,	The	Cloisters	in	northern	Manhattan,
and	the	Botanical	Gardens	in	the	Bronx.	There	was	some	other	miscellaneous	stuff,
and	I	also	went	to	Chicago	for	a	week	at	one	point,	but	the	way	I	go	about	this	sort
of	thing	is	to	get	a	bit	immersed	instead	of	just	skipping	across	the	surface.
	
Interesting?	Probably	not,	but	that’s	what	I’m	doing,	head	flipped	back	over	the	end
of	the	couch,	mouth	agape,	somber	music	filling	the	room,	when	in	walks	Jolene
plus	 one.	 Although	 viewing	 the	 situation	 upside	 down,	 I	 can	 see	 that	 she	 has
brought	home	a	stray.	I	hit	the	pause	button,	close	my	mouth,	and	roll	awkwardly
over,	backward	and	upward	until	I’m	approximately	upright.
	

=== Page 62 ===
Jolene	 introduces	 me	 to	 Zach.	 He’s	 tall,	 thin,	 early	 twenties	 and	 exceedingly
groomed.	He	has	one	of	those	closely	trimmed	moustache	and	partial	beard	deals
that	combine	with	his	two	small	hoop	earrings	to	give	him	a	pirate-ish	air.	I’m
pained	to	think	that	just	shaving	and	trimming	hair	must	take	him	an	hour	each
morning,	which	is	about	what	I	spend	on	it	per	annum.	I	shake	his	hand,	trying	not
to	come	off	like	Jolene’s	parent	or	guardian,	and	tell	them	to	make	themselves	at
home.
	
Jolene	grabs	some	bottles	of	iced	tea	out	of	the	fridge	and	passes	them	around
before	plopping	down	on	the	futon	I	just	sprang	up	from,	so	I	turn	off	the	TV	and
DVD	player	and	start	to	consider	what	I	want	to	do	next.	Zach	stands	nearby,
holding	his	bottle,	and	I’m	just	standing	there	holding	mine,	and	I	start	to	get	the
idea	that	we’re	all	here	together	rather	than	them	being	together	and	me	going	away.
Being	socially	inept,	my	usual	response	to	situations	like	this	is	to	do	what	I	like
and	let	people	be	offended	if	they	want.	In	this	case,	that	means	I	leave,	which	I
start	to	do	when	Jolene	speaks	up.
	
“Zach	and	I	met	at	the	coffee	shop,”	she	informs	me.	I	knew	she	had	heard	about
some	nearby	coffee	place	with	a	mystical	motif	and	a	spiritually	oriented	crowd	and
that	was	where	she	had	gone	off	to	this	afternoon.	I	didn’t	know	they	offered	take-
outs	like	young	Zach,	but	it	really	couldn’t	be	less	of	my	business.	Seeing	that	I
have	no	response	but	an	insipid	smile,	she	continues.
	
“Zach	is	going	to	be	a	really	great	spiritual	teacher	someday,”	she	goes	on.	“He	was
in	the	coffee	shop	talking	and	there	were	like	ten	people	standing	around	his	table
listening	to	him.”	She	smiles	at	me	and	there’s	a	twinkle	of	playfulness	in	her	look,
so	now	I’m	a	little	more	interested.	What	has	she	dragged	back	to	our	lair,	and	why?
	
“I	told	him	about	you,”	she	says	and	I	feel	my	head	tilt	slightly.	I	know	she	didn’t
tell	him	about	me,	but	I	guess	she	told	him	something.	“I	told	him	you	had	very
strong	spiritual	beliefs	but	that	they	were	not	really	in	the	mainstream	and	that	you
were	writing	a	book,	and	he	said	he’d	like	to	meet	you	someday	and	I	said	how
‘bout	now?”
	
I’m	intrigued	because	I	know	that	she	hasn’t	done	what	it	looks	like	she’s	done	and
I’m	wondering	what	she’s	really	doing.	I’m	also	amused	by	the	fact	that	she’s	doing
it;	playing	me	without	me	knowing	exactly	how.	She	hasn’t	brought	him	here	so	she
could	watch	me	devour	him	like	something	out	of	an	episode	of	My	Uncle	the
Vampire.	That	would	be	pointless	and	unkind,	which	she’s	not,	so	her	little	tease

=== Page 63 ===
isn’t	working	on	that	level,	but	that	doesn’t	explain	what	she	is	doing.	Why	did	she
bring	this	young	man	here?
	
The	way	to	spring	the	trap	is	to	try	backing	out	of	it.	“She’s	overstated	it	a	bit,”	I
say	to	Zach.	“I	just	talk	a	good	game.”	I	start	heading	out.	“Excuse	me,	I	have	some
work	to	catch	up	on.”
	
“What’s	your	book	going	to	be	about?”	asks	Zach,	trying	to	get	a	game	going.	I
look	at	Jolene	who	looks	back	with	mock	curiosity.
	
“No	book,”	I	say,	“just	playing	with	some	ideas—”
	
“Jolene	said	you	didn’t	really	agree	with—”
	
“Really,	I	don’t	know	much—”
	
“You	know,	tradition	teaches	us—”
	
“Conformity	and	stagnation?”
	
“Huh?”
	
“I	thought	you	were	going	to	say	that	tradition	teaches	conformity	and	stagnation.”
	
“I	mean	Buddhist	tradition.	Buddhist	tradition	shows	us—”
	
“Forget	tradition.	Start	fresh,	you’ll	have	a	much	better	time	of	it.	Start	your	own
tradition.	Really,	I	have	to	run—”
	
He	laughs	a	bit.	“You	can’t	just	dismiss	centuries	of—”
	
“Sure	you	can,”	I	say.	“In	fact,	you	have	to,	or	else	you’ll	end	up	right	where
everyone	always	ends	up.	What’s	the	point	of	that?”
	
He	laughs	a	bit	uncomfortably,	sizing	me	up	to	see	what	he’s	dealing	with.	Tradition
is	just	a	word	for	stuff	you	accept	as	true	without	verifying	it	for	yourself.	Tradition
is	the	deeply	rutted	path	that	gets	formed	after	many	years	of	being	followed	by	the
herd.	Buddha	said	this...	Shankara	said	that...	Who	gives	a	fat	rat’s	ass	what	they
said	or	what	anyone	said?	You	don’t	know	they	said	it,	you	don’t	know	what	they
meant	by	it,	you	don’t	know	if	it’s	been	passed	down	accurately,	you	don’t	even

=== Page 64 ===
know	they	existed,	so	what	do	you	know?	You	don’t	know	anything,	and	even	if
you	did,	you	still	wouldn’t.	It’s	self-verify	or	fail,	simple	as	that.	The	uncritical
acceptance	typical	of	the	herd	mentality	is	the	soil	in	which	all	false	beliefs	take
root.	Instead	of	self-reliance	and	self-determination,	most	people	just	buy	a	package
deal;	no	thinking	required.
	
“Jolene	told	me	you	like	to	take	a	subjective	approach.”
	
Yes,	I	am	reminded,	Jolene	is	all	that	matters	here.
	
“As	opposed	to	what?”	I	ask.
	
“As	opposed	to	taking	an	objective	look,”	he	says.	He	seems	to	catch	a	wave	of
energy	and	suddenly	he’s	off.	“You	have	to	get	the	whole	picture,	you	have	to
understand	just	what	a	really	great	evolutionary	plan	we’re	a	part	of.	This	whole
thing,	this	whole	planet	earth	and	human	race	and	all	the	rest	of	it,	it’s	like	this	one
great	big	spiraling	self-evolving	experiment	in	the	mind	of	God.	I	plan	on	going	to	a
Zen	monastery	as	soon	as	I	can	get	up	the	money	to	get	to	Kyoto.	Get	myself	into
the	presence	of	a	true	master.	Those	people	really	understand	this	stuff.”
	
He’s	a	full-body	talker.	His	energy	extends	outward	into	his	arms	and	legs	so	the	his
hands	lend	emphasis	to	every	point	and	his	whole	body	moves	up	and	down,	to	and
fro.	He	has	to	set	his	bottle	of	tea	down	or	he’d	jostle	it	all	over	the	floor.	I
prudishly	place	a	coaster	under	his	bottle	and	he	doesn’t	miss	a	beat.
	
“We	look	at	this	whole	thing,	this	whole	world	thing,	as	if	it’s	real,	but	there’s	no
reality	 to	 it,”	 he	 exclaims	 animatedly.	 “Perception	 creates	 reality,	 but	 whose
perception?	Mine?	Yours?	Jolene’s?”
	
I	shake	my	head	in	wide-eyed	bewilderment.
	
“No,”	he	continues,	“because	we	have	no	more	reality	than	anything	else.	That’s	the
whole	thing	Zen	teaches	us,	that	there	is	no	us.	Ego,	self,	me,	you,	it’s	all	an
illusion,	a	facade.	Zen	destroys	the	facade.	That’s	the	purpose	of	zazen,	of	sitting	in
meditation	under	the	guidance	of	a	great	roshi.	That’s	what	koans	are	for.	You	have
to	break	through	these	barriers.	It’s	all	really	so	simple.	They	make	it	seem	so
complicated	so	you	have	to	keep	coming	to	them	to	get	it	explained	or	something,
you	know,	the	religious	people	and	the	gurus	and	everyone,	but	it’s	really	so	simple
—”
	

=== Page 65 ===
I	can	see	now	what	my	role	is	to	be.	I	would	never	consider	conducting	any	sort	of
dialogue	with	Zach	since	he’s	very	much	in	the	outward-expression	mode	and
nowhere	close	to	the	shut-up-and-listen	mode.	He	has	no	questions,	only	answers.
Anyway,	Jolene	wouldn’t	have	brought	him	here	just	to	see	me	debate	him	on	his
level.	I	start	to	suspect	that	the	reason	she	did	bring	him	here	is	quite	nearly	the
same	reason	for	her	coming	here	in	the	first	place.
	
“We’re	all	just	pieces,”	continues	Zach	without	pause,	“small	units	playing	our	role
in	this	vast	spatio-temporal	matrix,	like	a	universal	continuum,	you	know?	We’re	all
so	small,	and	yet,	each	of	us	is	like	the	whole	thing.	It	looks	like	there’s	all	this	stuff
going	on,	but	there	is	no	stuff;	no	you,	no	me.	That’s	the	whole	point	of	Zen
Buddhism	and	that’s	why	it’s	so	cool.	You	don’t	learn	it,	you	do	it.	You	don’t	study
and	work	hard	to	master	concepts,	you	sit	and	work	on	koans	under	a	qualified
roshi	until	the	whole	illusion	thing	just	pops	out	of	existence.	See?	Ultimately	there
is	only	consciousness.	Everything	else	is	just	perception.”
	
“Cool,”	I	say,	smiling	and	nodding	to	keep	him	going.	Out	of	the	corner	of	my	eye	I
see	what	I	hope	to	see.	Jolene	has	a	polite,	attentive	smile	pasted	on	her	face,	but	in
her	eyes	I	can	see	that	this	little	get	together	is	playing	out	as	well	as	could	be
hoped.	She	is	seriously	unamused.	Maybe	Zach	sounded	better	to	her	in	the	coffee
shop.	Probably	she’s	never	seen	anyone	like	Zach,	or	been	exposed	to	this	sort	of
big,	fun,	spiritual	odyssey	approach	before.
	
“There’s	 only	 one	 truth,	 dude,	 see?	 And	 it	 doesn’t	 matter	 what	 you	 call	 your
spiritual	path,	whether	it’s	Christianity	or	Buddhism	or	Catholic	or	Zen,	cause	it’s
really	all	the	same	thing.	This	right	here,”	he	indicates	us,	the	loft,	earth,	the	third
dimension,	“this	ain’t	it,	man.	This	ain’t	the	real	thing.	The	real	thing	is,	like,
beyond	all	our	dreams.”
	
I	see	how	he	functions.	I	see	that	he’s	so	consumed	by	playing	his	big	expressive
role	that	it	will	be	virtually	impossible	for	him	to	hear	anything	except	his	next	cue.
I	test	this	theory	with	an	out-of-nowhere	question	so	Jolene	can	see	it	too.
	
“But	what	about	war?”	I	ask.
	
“War,	exactly!	That’s	what	I’m	saying.	If	everyone	would	just,	you	know,	like	burst
out	of	their	self-centered	me-me-me	mindset	and	try	to	adopt	the	universal	view
which,	like	I’m	saying,	is	the	real	thing,	the	way	things	really	are,	then	they’d	forget
all	about	war.	Can	you	imagine	what	a	paradise	this	world	could	be	if	everyone	just
became,	like,	aware	of	their	true	potential?	Can	you	imagine?”	He	looks	to	both

=== Page 66 ===
Jolene	and	me	to	see	if	we	can	imagine	and	is	too	swept	up	in	his	own	momentum
to	 notice	 that	 we’re	 not	 exactly	 in	 the	 same	 space	 he’s	 in.	 “War	 would	 be
completely	forgotten.	It	would	be	like	something	in	the	history	books.	And	instead
of	man	focusing	all	his	attention	and	resources	on,	you	know,	the	Pentagon	and
controlling	other	people	and	stuff,	we	could	focus	on	the	things	that	really	matter,
like	feeding	people	and	curing	disease	and	flood	relief	and	stuff.	Can	you	imagine	if
everyone	just	stopped	all	this	coveting	and	hatred	and	fear	and	really	started	pulling
together	and	trying	to	make	a	difference?	Think	of	what	a	wonderful	paradise	this
whole	world	could	be	if	there	were	no	more	polluters	and	oil	spills	and	crime	and
stuff.	This	would	be	paradise.	It	would	be	like	heaven	except	not	later	in	some
weird,	you	know,	after	you	die	and	clouds	and	everything,	but	right	here,	on	earth.
That’s	what	God	really	wants	for	us	but	we’ve	totally	screwed	it	up.”
	
He	pauses	to	take	a	breath	and	to	see	if	we’re	managing	to	keep	up.	It’s	obvious	that
he’s	reading	from	several	different	scripts.	A	not	uncommon	approach;	Melting-Pot
Spirituality,	New	Age	Eclectic.	He’s	like	a	bag	lady	combing	the	alleyways	of
esoteric	philosophy	and	tossing	every	pretty	bauble	and	goo-gaw	he	finds	into	his
magical	mystery	cart,	eager	to	share	his	mismatched	collection	with	anyone	who
can’t	distinguish	priceless	from	worthless.	I	suppose	that	if	he	ever	gets	to	a	Kyoto
monastery	the	first	thing	they’ll	do	is	hoist	him	up	by	the	ankles	and	shake	all	this
loose	crap	out	of	him	like	weapons	off	a	cartoon	gangster.
	
I’m	toning	his	speech	down	a	bit	in	order	to	give	the	reader	some	idea	of	what	he
was	saying	without	using	all	the	exclamation	points	a	more	accurate	rendering
would	 require.	 I’ve	 also	 taken	 the	 liberty	 of	 removing	 many	 hundreds	 of	 you
knows,	 likes,	 stuffs,	 mans	 and	 dudes.	 I	 never	 really	 had	 much	 exposure	 to
coffeehouse	spirituality,	if	that’s	what	this	could	be	called,	but	I’m	actually	enjoying
it.	Zach	has	a	lot	of	personal	charm	and	the	fact	that	he’s	so	stoked	up	by	what	he’s
talking	about	makes	him	fun	to	listen	to,	for	me	anyway.	I	don’t	think	Jolene	is
having	so	much	fun.	I	look	and	see	what	Zach	has	failed	to	notice;	Jolene	is	staring
straight	through	him.	I	also	see	that	this	couldn’t	have	been	planned	better;	Zach’s
scattergun	message	and	unique	style	of	spiritual	carpetbombing	is	exactly	what	she
needs	to	be	seeing	right	now.
	
“So	what	can	we	do	about	it?”	I	ask,	not	wanting	to	let	Zach	pause	too	long	and	lose
his	momentum.	He	eyes	me	for	an	instant	to	see	if	I’m	sincere	and	either	decides	I
am	or	that	it	doesn’t	matter	before	launching	back	into	his	discourse.	I	want	to	keep
him	going	a	bit	longer	because	I	want	Jolene	to	get	this	and	be	done	with	it.
Whatever	is	operating	in	her,	I	don’t	want	it	left	squirming	because	I	was	soft	and

=== Page 67 ===
wanted	to	be	gentle	with	her.	It’s	much	more	humane	to	get	these	things	killed	while
the	killing	is	good.
	
“Exactly!”	Zach	resumes	with	infectious	good	cheer.	“What	can	we	do?	That’s	the
whole	issue.	The	whole	question	of,	you	know,	spirituality,	of	religion,	comes	down
to	that	one	thing;	what	can	we	actually	do?	We	have	to	grow,	expand.	We	have	to
shake	off	this,”	here	he	twists	his	mouth	and	squints	his	eyes	and	curls	his	fingers
into	claws	to	convey	his	disgust	at	what	most	people	call	life,	“this	smallness,	this
smallness,”	he	says.	He	looks	to	see	if	I	get	it.	I	have	the	next	question	in	my	eyes.
Yes,	my	gaze	asks,	but	how?
	
“How	do	we	do	it?”	he	states	it	aloud.	“That’s	the	big	question.	How	do	we	get	out
of	 our	 small	 irrelevant	 little	 selves	 and	 start	 enjoying,	 you	 know,	 reaping	 the
benefits	of	our	true	potential?	It’s	all	about	self-realization.	That’s	all	it	is,	really.	It
all	sounds	so	massive	and,	you	know,	like	science	fiction,	but	it’s	not.	That’s	the
thing.	This	isn’t	all	pie	in	the	sky	and	everything.	This	is	the	truth	of	each	one	of	us.
This	is	who	we	really	are.”
	
And?	say	my	eyes.
	
“And,”	he	rocks	on,	“that’s	what	we	have	to	do.	We	have	to	break	out	of	these	tiny
little	shells	and	then	we	can	step	up	into	our	true	universal	selves.	That’s	where	it’s
at.	All	this	here,	everything	we	think	of	as	everything	is	really	like	nothing.	That’s
what	Zen	is	all	about,	returning	to	our	true	state;	the	state	of	non-being.	Once	we	do
that,	realize	our	true	state,	we’re	liberated.	No	more	coming	back.	No	more	cycle	of
births	and	deaths.	No	more	karma,	no	more	suffering.	We’re	finally	free!”
	
Zach	goes	on	for	another	few	minutes	but	starts	losing	energy	and	fumbling	a	bit
when	it	comes	to	the	actual	methods	by	which	such	liberation	might	be	attained.	He
has	some	favorable	views	on	meditation,	prana,	kundalini,	getting	outside	more,
eating	better,	reading	elevating	books,	drinking	green	tea,	and	spending	less	time	in
malls.	He	looks	around	at	our	fairly	upscale	digs	and	gives	me	a	look	that	suggests	I
might	take	an	honest	look	my	own	overly	acquisitive	tendencies.	I	guess	Jolene
didn’t	tell	him	it	was	a	rental.
	
The	point	of	sharing	all	this	isn’t	to	poke	fun	at	Zach	or	anyone	at	Zach’s	particular
level	of	comprehension.	I	think	I	was	probably	like	Zach	myself	at	some	point;
thrilled	and	awed,	eager	to	express	and	share,	a	little	sketchy	as	far	as	doctrine
went;	a	big-eyed	boy	in	a	vast	toystore	of	shiny	new	ideas.	Jolene	is	probably	right,
a	few	more	years	and	someone	with	Zach’s	enthusiasm	and	powerful	presence	will

=== Page 68 ===
probably	be	playing	the	satsang	circuit.	He	can’t	keep	pounding	out	his	crazy	jazz
chops,	though.	It’s	not	enough	to	be	a	great	player,	you’ve	got	to	have	something	to
play.	People	want	a	catchy	melody	laid	over	a	soothing,	familiar	harmony.	If	he’s
smart	he’ll	hitch	his	wagon	to	Advaita;	that’s	the	hot	new	sound.	He’s	tending
toward	Zen,	but	that	tune	has	been	played	to	death.	The	industry	needs	a	new	Zen
and	Advaita	fits	the	bill;	it	sounds	exotic,	it	means	something	vaguely	profound	yet
unthreatening,	and	no	one	cares	about	its	roots	so	it	comes	with	no	baggage	and	can
be	molded	to	meet	the	demands	of	the	marketplace.	No,	it’s	not	a	merchandiser’s
dream	like	Zen,	but	they’ll	fix	that	and	soon	we’ll	all	be	buying	Advaita	cookware
and	Advaita	thongs	and	Advaita	ceiling	tiles	in	no	time.	A	sugary	sort	of	Advaita
junk-philosophy	has	already	begun	to	emerge	and	I’m	sure	it	will	have	its	own	key
figures—perhaps	Zach	someday—writing	books	and	instructing	us	in	the	Way	of
Nonduality.	Shit,	as	I	think	about	it	I’m	talking	myself	into	writing	another	book,
something	with	huge	commercial	appeal,	like	
Zen	and	the	Tao	of	Advaita:	The
Pathless	Path	of	No-Mind	to	Not-Twoness
.
	
Or	maybe	Zach	will	go	to	Kyoto	and	hang	around	the	ball-busters	for	awhile.	That’s
a	sad	thought.	Westerners	seem	to	get	a	strong	Zen	buzz	built	up	and	the	next	thing
you	know	they’re	returning	from	a	Zen	monastery	five	years	later	with	less	to	show
for	those	years	than	if	they’d	been	spent	in	prison	or	a	coma.	Admirably,	they
seldom	allow	failure	to	discourage	them	from	writing	a	book	on	the	subject.
	
Most	likely,	young	Zach	will	just	get	himself	situated	at	his	own	spiritual	comfort
level	and	go	on	to	live	a	normal	life.	Anyway,	Zach	isn’t	my	concern,	Jolene	is.	I
manage	to	usher	Zach	out	as	Jolene	makes	a	vague	promise	to	meet	him	at	the
coffee	shop	before	she	leaves	the	city.	When	I	return	to	the	living	area	Jolene	has
gone	to	her	own	room	and	closed	the	door.
	
	
Bookstore	Guru
	
On	the	last	full	day	of	Jolene’s	visit,	one	of	the	big	downtown	bookstores	is	hosting
a	lunch	hour	reading	and	booksigning	by	a	bestselling	New	Age	author.	She	wanted
to	go	and	hear	him	speak.	She	asked	me	to	go	with	her,	which	I	did,	but	I	didn’t
want	to	listen	to	this	person	speak,	so	when	we	got	to	the	store	I	sent	her	in	alone
and	we	made	arrangements	to	meet	up	after.
	
I	arrive	at	our	appointed	meeting	place	early,	but	she’s	earlier.	She	looks	pretty
dejected	and	I’m	starting	to	have	a	pretty	good	idea	why.	She	came	here	looking	for
something	and	she’s	not	finding	it.	The	guy	who	spoke	at	the	bookstore	sells	a	lot	of

=== Page 69 ===
books	and	she	understood	that	to	mean	that	he	had	something	valid	to	say.	She
assumed,	as	many	do,	that	the	more	popular	a	teacher	is,	the	more	valuable	the
teaching.
	
“You’re	too	young	and	pretty	to	look	so	sad,”	I	tell	her.
	
“I’m	fine,”	she	replies.	“Can	we	go	somewhere	else?”
	
“Walk	or	sit?”
	
“Walk,	I	guess.”
	
We	walk	and	I	don’t	talk.	I’m	glad	she	seems	sad	and	angry.	I	would	have	been
surprised	and	a	bit	disappointed	if	she’d	come	away	from	that	event	in	high	spirits.	I
knew	she	wouldn’t,	though,	but	that	was	no	reason	to	discourage	her	from	going.
Just	the	opposite.	If	she	had	a	yearning	to	take	a	closer	look	at	this	particular	fellow
and	his	views	but	didn’t	follow	through	because	she	sensed	I	wouldn’t	approve,	that
would	have	just	been	repression	and	she’d	have	to	deal	with	the	source	of	the
yearning	again	later	in	a	more	pernicious	form.	The	process	of	awakening	is	a	series
of	disillusionments,	and	each	one	hurts.
	
We	head	down	into	the	subway	and	catch	the	c-train.	We	emerge	at	81st	street	and
head	into	Central	Park.	We	amble	about	and	she	shows	signs	of	recognizing	where
we	are	and	starts	bubbling	up	out	of	her	gloom.	She	knows	parts	of	the	park	from
different	movies	she’s	seen.	She’s	still	not	talkative	and	I’m	not	wishing	she	was,	so
we	head	over	to	Fifth	near	the	museums	and	hail	a	cab	back	to	the	loft.	Instead	of
going	up,	though,	we	stroll	down	the	street	to	a	coffee	place,	grab	some	fancy
drinks	and	settle	in	on	an	overstuffed	couch.	She	tucks	her	legs	under	her	so	she’s
able	to	face	me	more	directly.
	
I	want	to	talk	about	nothing	for	a	few	minutes.	I	know	what	kind	of	mindset	she’s	in
and	I	want	to	help	her	relax	a	little	and	not	be	jumping	out	of	her	skin.	I	launch	into
a	very	endearing	little	diatribe	about	how	the	marketing	bastards	at	the	ministry	of
newspeak	have	so	effectively	removed	the	words	small,	medium	and	large	from	our
vocabulary	 that	 coffee	 vendors	 and	 fast	 food	 clerks	 can’t	 even	 translate	 them
anymore.	If	you	want	a	medium	coffee	or	a	small	order	of	fries,	I	explain	to	Jolene
who	isn’t	half	listening,	you	have	to	learn	that	particular	establishment’s	particular
jargon.	In	one	place,	small,	medium	and	large	might	now	be	Grande,	Supremo	and
El	Presidente.	In	the	next	place	they’re	Large	(small),	Extra	Large	(medium),	and
Aversion	Therapy	(large).	Most	annoying	is	the	blank	look	you	receive	from	the

=== Page 70 ===
clerk	when	you	try	to	revert	to	simpler	but	unsanctioned	terminology.	“So,	Extra
Large	is	medium?”	you	ask.	“No,	like,	uh,	Extra	Large	is	Extra	Large,”	you’re	told.
	
I	look	up	when	she	doesn’t	respond	and	find	a	startling	sight.	She	is	staring	at	me,
wide-eyed,	tears	streaming	down	her	face.	She	is	completely	open	and	unabashed,
making	no	effort	to	conceal	herself.	She	allows	herself	to	be	profoundly	exposed.	I
show	respect	for	her	unguardedness	by	gazing	back	at	her	with	equal	frankness.	Her
breathing	is	a	barely	audible	moan.	This	is	a	very	sad	young	lady.
	
“I	feel	so	small,”	she	says	in	a	hoarse	whisper.	“I	feel	so	alone.	I’ve	never	felt	like
this.	I	don’t	see	an	end.	I	don’t	see	how	it	can	get	better.”
	
I	don’t	reply	right	away.	My	natural	tendency,	like	anyone’s,	I	suppose,	would	be	to
console	her,	but	she’s	in	the	early	stages	of	grieving	for	her	own	lost	life,	feeling	the
separation	from	herself	and	processing	that	unexpected	and	unprecedented	loss.	She
doesn’t	need	to	be	consoled	at	this	point,	she	needs	to	go	through	this	and	come	out
the	other	side.	The	thing	she’s	grieving	for	isn’t	fully	dead	and	the	thing	that’s
grieving	isn’t	fully	born,	so	what	she’s	going	through	right	now	is	more	like	the
coming	attractions	reel.
	
“Try	to	step	out	of	yourself	and	observe	this	moment,”	I	tell	her.	“I	know	that
sounds	difficult,	that	you’re	completely	immersed	right	now,	but	it’s	important.	You
have	to	learn	to	separate	yourself	from	your	character	and	the	best	time	to	do	that	is
when	it’s	hardest	to	do.	Anyone	can	enter	the	witnessing	mode	when	it’s	all	blue
skies,	the	trick	is	doing	it	when	black	clouds	are	rolling	in.	Look	at	this	pain	you’re
feeling.	Look	at	the	person	experiencing	the	pain	through	my	eyes	instead	of	yours.
Take	a	breath	and	do	it	now.”
	
She	takes	a	breath	and	releases	a	long	shuddering	sigh.	She	closes	her	eyes	and	I
turn	my	attention	away.	When	I	look	back,	little	Jolene	is	eying	me	with	the	half
smirk	of	someone	who	brought	a	gun	to	a	knife	fight.	That’s	a	good	look	to	have.
	
“Can	I	tell	you	why	I	came	here?”	she	asks.	“Why	I	wanted	to	see	you?”
	
“Can	I	tell	you?”	I	reply.	She	remains	motionless	for	a	second,	then	nods.
	
“You	want	someplace	to	go.	You	want	to	find	a	group	of	people	to	be	with.	You
want	to	land	somewhere,	to	be	part	of	something.	You	hope	that	there	is	such	a
thing.”
	

=== Page 71 ===
She’s	biting	her	bottom	lip	now	and	nodding	her	head.
	
“Something	around	Buddhism,	I	guess.	Something	in	California?”
	
She	nods	silently.
	
“Zen?”
	
Another	nod.
	
“You	made	a	wrong	turn,”	I	say.	“California’s	the	other	way.”
	
She	doesn’t	move.
	
“Or	maybe	you	already	knew	the	answer	and	you	didn’t	want	to	believe	it,	so	now
I’ll	say	it	for	you.	You’re	already	beyond	Buddhism.	Buddhism,	even	Zen,	would	be
a	step	backward	for	you,	and	there	are	no	backward	steps.	We	can	never	go	back,
it’s	not	an	option.	You	understand	that?”
	
She	nods.
	
“You’re	on	your	own,	kid.	You’re	already	further	out	than	Buddhism	goes.	You’re
further	out	than	anyone	can	go	with	you.	You	know	there’s	no	more	being	a	part	of
things	for	you	and	you	came	to	see	me	in	a	bit	of	a	panic,	looking	for	a	different
answer.	You	want	to	hook	up,	maybe	to	Buddhism,	maybe	to	some	bestselling
author	or	cool-groove	satsang	teacher.	Maybe	to	me.	Maybe	you	thought	I	could
catch	you,	reel	you	in,	make	it	all	solid	for	you	again,	you	think?”
	
She	sits	motionless,	head	down.
	
“You	had	firm	footing	and	you	started	losing	it	that	day	when	you	saw	the	cows	in
church.	Now	you’re	scrambling	to	find	it	again,	but	you	never	will.	You’re	floating
up	out	of	the	warm	muck	in	which	most	people	spend	their	lives.	That	muck	is	the
only	life	you’ve	ever	known	and	now	you’re	leaving	it	behind.	Very	scary.	Don’t
waste	time	feeling	bad	about	it,	everyone	panics	at	this	point.	You	can’t	not.	No	one
slips	gracefully	beneath	the	waves.	This	is	way	past	bravery	and	cowardice;	those
terms	mean	nothing	here.”
	
“Is	this	the	First	Step?”	she	asks.
	

=== Page 72 ===
“Yes,	 this	 is	 the	 First	 Step,	 which	 is	 really	 the	 last	 step.	 See	 that?	 Between
Damnedest	and	Spiritual	Autolysis	you	didn’t	need	me.	You	already	had	everything
you	needed.	You	could	have	saved	yourself	the	airfare.”
	
She	doesn’t	laugh	or	smile.	In	her	eyes	I	see	that	she	is	already	older	than	most
people	ever	get.
	
	
City	Lights
	
We	arrive	back	at	the	loft	worn	out	and	hungry.	I	grab	a	bite	and	lay	down	for	a	nap,
telling	Jolene	to	fend	for	herself.	She’s	leaving	early	in	the	morning	and	I	think
she’s	a	little	disappointed	to	discover	that	we’re	not	doing	a	nice	restaurant	or
theater	or	anything	special	on	her	last	night.	I	wake	up	from	my	nap	at	around	7:30
and	find	her	dozing	on	the	futon.	I	nudge	her	with	a	foot	and	she	opens	her	eyes.
	
“Hi,”	she	says.
	
“Hi,”	I	say	back.	“Get	ready,	we’re	going	out.”
	
She	rolls	up	onto	her	knees.	“Should	I	dress	up?”	she	asks	eagerly.
	
I	look	at	her	like	she’s	nuts.	“No,	anything	is	fine.”
	
“Oh,”	she	says,	disappointed.	“Okay.”
	
We	head	out	and	up	a	few	streets	where	it’s	easier	to	find	a	cab.	I	give	the	driver	a
street	address.	He	says,	“You	mean	the…”	and	I	say,	“make	it	the	Seaport,”	before
he	blurts	it	out.	A	few	minutes	later	we	emerge	from	the	financial	district	to	the	East
River	piers.	We	get	out	of	the	cab	near	the	Seaport	and	head	south	on	foot,	the	Twin
Towers	looming	large	above.	She	sees	a	sign	for	the	Staten	Island	Ferry.
	
“Are	we	gonna	ride	the	ferry?”	she	asks.
	
“Doesn’t	that	sound	like	fun?”
	
She	tries	to	sound	enthusiastic.	“Yeah!”
	
I	laugh	and	we	continue	walking.	I	stop	in	front	of	the	heliport.
	

=== Page 73 ===
“What’s	this?”	she	asks.
	
“What’s	it	look	like?”	I	ask.
	
“A	helicopter	place,”	she	says.
	
“That’s	what	it	is,	a	helicopter	place.”
	
“Yeah,	so?	What	are	we	doing	here?”	she	says.
	
I	borrow	a	line	from	Contact.	“Wanna	take	a	ride?”
	
Her	eyes	get	huge.
	
“No	way!”	She	wallops	me	a	good	one.
	
“Way.”
	
“No	way!!”	she	says	and	I	jump	back	before	the	next	walloping.
	
“Uh,	way.”
	
“Wow!	Really?	Where	are	we	going?”
	
“It’s	called	a	City	Lights	Tour.	We’re	just	going	to	fly	around	Manhattan.	Probably
from	here	to	the	Statue	of	Liberty,	up	the	Hudson,	hook	around	the	Bronx	and	down
the	East	River.	See	the	city,	the	bridges,	or,	you	know,	Jersey	and	Brooklyn	if	you
get	a	shitty	seat.”
	
She	darkens	a	few	degrees.
	
“A	shitty	seat?	How	many	people—?”
	
I	laugh.	“Just	you	and	me,	kid.	Now	this	is	a	pretty	romantic	thing,	so	I	don’t	want
you	getting	all	gooshy	on	me—”
	
She	pushes	me	and	then	gets	very	solemn.
	
“I	can’t	do	this,”	she	says	quietly.	“It’s	too	much.	This	must	cost	like	a	thousand
dollars.”

=== Page 74 ===
	
“Not	quite.	Anyway,	you’re	doing	me	the	favor.	I’ve	wanted	to	do	this	for	years,	but
not	alone.	You’re	doing	this	for	me	as	much	as	I’m	doing	it	for	you,	okay?”
	
“Really?”	she	says,	almost	pleading.
	
“Really.”
	
For	a	few	hundred	dollars	you	can	jump	out	of	an	airplane	two	miles	high	and
probably	live.	For	under	a	hundred	bucks	your	local	flight	instructor	will	take	you
up	in	a	Cessna	and	let	you	drive.	For	less	than	a	thousand	you	can	take	a	night	flight
over	one	of	the	world’s	great	cities	at	its	most	radiant	and	splendid	in	a	privately
chartered	 helicopter.	 Bungee	 jumping,	 supercoasters,	 whitewater	 rafting,	 at	 ten
times	the	price	these	experiences	would	be	among	the	greatest	bargains	one	can
strike	in	life;	the	most	memorable	and	cherished.	These	are	the	things	that	will	be
with	us	on	the	deathbed,	not	the	money	we	didn’t	spend.	The	cost	of	this	night	flight
isn’t	going	to	put	a	dent	in	my	lifestyle,	but	even	if	it	was	my	last	nickel,	to	what
better	use	could	I	possibly	put	it?
	
We	go	in.	I	leave	her	in	the	seating	area	while	I	handle	some	things	at	the	counter
and	hit	the	head.	I	return	and	we	go	back	outside	to	talk.	We	have	time	before
moonrise	so	we	go	for	a	stroll.
	
Time	to	give	Jolene	what	she	came	for.
	
“Within	the	context	of	your	personal	life,	of	your	future,	Jolene,	what	can	you	say
for	sure?”
	
She	knows	this	is	something	she’s	supposed	to	think	about	and	she	does.	She	takes
a	full	minute	before	she	answers.
	
“Well,	I’m	going	to	die,	I	guess.”
	
“You	guess?”
	
“No,	I	mean,	I	don’t	guess.	It	just	sounds	weird	to	say	it.”
	
“Say	what?”
	
“I’m	going	to	die.”

=== Page 75 ===
	
“There’s	a	line	in	
The	Mahabharata
,	Krishna	talking	to	Karna,	the	warrior	who	will
fight	Arjuna.	Krishna	is	telling	Karna,	in	essence,	that	Arjuna’s	victory	is	assured.”
	
“Yeah,	I	watched	it.”
	
“Krishna	 tells	 him,	 ‘Look,	 it’s	 spring,	 the	 buds	 are	 sweet,	 the	 water	 sparkles,
everyone	is	joyful.	We	are	going	to	die.’”
	
She	looks	at	me	for	a	long	moment,	wondering	where	this	is	going.	In	this	or	any
similar	conversation,	there	are	two	different	dynamics	at	work.	There’s	the	apparent
dynamic,	which	is	what	Jolene	sees	and	what	any	onlooker	would	see,	and	there’s
the	underlying	dynamic,	which	is	what	I	see	and	where	the	real	work	is	getting
done.	It’s	as	true	of	me	and	Jolene	standing	on	a	New	York	sidewalk	as	it	is	of	any
conversation	I	have	or	words	I	write.	The	person	who	appears	to	be	the	intended
recipient	is,	in	a	way,	just	an	agent,	a	go-between,	and	sometimes	an	unwitting	one.
	
It	looks	like	I’m	talking	to	Jolene,	but	I’m	really	talking	through	her.	I’m	speaking
past	the	shell	to	the	little	bastard	within.	(I	always	think	of	it	as	a	masculine	energy
regardless	of	the	host’s	gender.)	The	little	bastard	is	hidden	in	there,	deep	behind	the
eyes.	He’s	jumping	up	and	down,	waving	his	arms,	trying	to	get	my	attention.	He
doesn’t	know	exactly	what	he	wants	from	me,	but	he	thinks	I	know	and	he’s	right.
He	wants	what	any	revolutionary	plotting	a	violent	overthrow	wants;	weapons	and
intelligence.	Things	that	burn	and	destroy,	and	the	knowledge	to	aim	them	and	use
them.	The	real	thing	that’s	going	on	here	is	that	rebel	forces	have	contacted	me	for
aid	and	I	am	surreptitiously	providing	it.	I’m	happy	to	oblige	them	because	that’s
what	I	do;	support	rebellion.	I	don’t	incite	it,	I	don’t	have	to;	it	incites	itself.	Then,	if
it	happens	to	seek	me	out,	in	book	or	in	person,	I’m	able	to	provide	what	it	needs.	I
have	to	sugarcoat	it	a	bit	so	Jolene	can	swallow	it,	but	once	it’s	in	her	system,	the
little	bastard	can	digest	it	at	his	leisure.	It’s	the	same	in	conversation	as	it	is	in	the
books	I	write.	The	information	in	the	books	could	be	provided	in	a	much	drier	form
in	much	less	space	and	be	much	less	palatable.	I	doubt	I’ve	ever	expressed	an
original	thought	or	one	that	hasn’t	been	expressed	many	ways	many	times	before.
The	secret’s	in	the	sauce.
	
The	battle	that	is	brewing	within	her	won’t	be	between	the	little	bastard	and	Jolene,
as	it	may	appear,	but	between	the	little	bastard	and	Maya.	Maya,	on	this	battlefield,
will	be	represented	by	fear,	and	the	little	bastard	by	hate.	Fear	vs	Hate.	Fear	of	No-
Self	vs	Hatred	of	False-Self.	These	are	the	armies	facing	each	other	on	the	fields	of
Kurukshetra.	These	are	the	forces	between	which	Arjuna	collapses.	This	is	the	one

=== Page 76 ===
true	war	of	which	all	others	are	but	shadows,	and	for	which	all	other	conflict	is	but	a
metaphor.
	
In	the	short	term,	Maya	almost	always	crushes	the	rebellion.	By	my	estimate,	her
win/loss	ratio	is	better	than	100,000,000:1.	By	using	her	vast	array	of	tricks	and
treats	to	buy,	charm,	misdirect,	or	distract	potential	rebels,	she	keeps	them	too
happy,	sad,	engrossed	or	content	to	move,	easily	and	effectively	precluding	an
uprising	before	it	gets	much	past	the	stage	of	mild	discontent.	In	the	long	term,
however,	the	overthrow	of	Maya	is	certain.	Truth	is	and	delusion	isn’t.	Ultimately,
duality	is	an	artificial	construct	and	when	it’s	gone,	truth	is	what	remains.	Viewed
this	way,	the	idea	that	Maya	is	evil,	that	delusion	is	negative,	that	the	dreamstate	is	a
prison,	or	that	the	dualistic	universe	is	anything	other	than	the	grandest	and	most
wonderful	of	all	blessings	is	laughably	absurd.	Why	hate	Maya?	Where	would	you
be	without	her?
	
Jolene	herself	is	only	vaguely	aware	that	this	battle	brews	within	her.	In	a	way,	she’s
just	an	innocent	bystander	caught	between	two	massing	armies.	Of	course,	the
rebels	are	just	a	small	band	of	peasants	with	pitchforks	at	this	stage,	but	they’re
getting	their	act	together.	They’ve	convinced	Jolene	to	make	this	trip	to	see	me,	and
they’ve	managed	to	get	the	attention	of	a	well-placed	sympathizer.	Not	bad.
	
Of	course,	you	can	just	say	that	the	little	bastard	is	a	part	of	Jolene.	That’s	true.	But
you	can	also	say	that	the	little	bastard	will	be	the	death	of	Jolene.	That’s	true	too.
	
	
Death	&	Discrimination
	
“You	and	I,	Jolene,	we’re	about	to	get	on	a	helicopter;	a	flying	deathtrap.	I	should
tell	you,	the	pilot	is	drunk	and	grossly	overweight.	His	wife	just	left	him	and	took
the	kids.	I	saw	him	blubbering	in	the	bathroom,	taking	pills.”	She	giggles.	“We
could	be	dead	a	few	minutes	from	now.	You	remember	I	mentioned	in	the	book
some	advice	I	gave	a	guy	from	a	Billy	Jack	movie?”
	
“
The	Trial	of	Billy	Jack,”
	she	corrects	me.	“I	saw	that	too.	If	you	knew	you	were
going	to	die	tomorrow,	how	much	would	this	really	matter?	That	was	the	question.”
	
“That’s	 absolution.	 Pre-absolution.	 That’s	 what	 death	 is,	 guaranteed	 absolution;
freedom	and	forgiveness	all	in	one.	If	you	understand	the	fact	of	your	own	death,
that	it’s	always	here	with	you	and	that	it’s	a	certainty,	then	you’re	free.	That’s
liberation;	knowing	that	nothing	is	yours	or	can	be	yours,	knowing	that	you	have

=== Page 77 ===
nothing	to	lose.	Other	people	push	death	away,	deny	it,	but	we	don’t	have	that
luxury.	We	have	to	pull	death	close,	embrace	it,	carry	it	in	our	hearts	and	minds.	I
don’t	mean	like	a	college	kid	getting	stoned	and	having	a	one-night	stand	with
existentialism,	I	mean	like	something	you	carry	in	your	pocket	and	always	have	one
hand	on.	There	are	two	kinds	of	people	in	the	world,	make-believe	people	and
serious	people.	You’re	a	serious	person	Jolene,	that’s	what	you’re	becoming.	You’re
in	the	game	now	and	you	have	to	play	by	the	rules.”
	
“You	always	say	that;	a	serious	person.	What	does	that	mean?”
	
“Focus.	It’s	all	about	focus.	You	have	to	learn	to	be	an	utter	failure	in	ninety-nine
percent	of	your	life.	You	can	accept	that	because	you’re	not	a	failure	in	the	one	part
that	matters.	You	have	to	jettison	all	sub-identities.	Be	a	bad	person,	a	bad	citizen.
Stop	shaping	yourself	to	the	world.	Shape	yourself	to	your	task	and	let	the	world
despise	you	or,	preferably,	forget	about	you.	You	want	to	be	a	good	citizen?	Vote?
Study	issues?”
	
She	ponders	and	nods.
	
“Fuck	it.	Be	a	crappy	citizen.	Better,	don’t	be	a	citizen	at	all.	Simply	abandon	that
identity.	 Chop	 it	 off.	 You	 want	 to	 be	 a	 good	 daughter?	 Friend?	 Sister?	 Wife
someday?	Mother?	Forget	it.	Let	it	all	go.	Simply	cut	away	all	these	anchors.	All
opinions	you	have	of	yourself	are	like	the	timbers	of	a	false	structure.	All	must	go.
All	will	go.	The	process	has	begun.	The	less	you	resist,	the	easier	it	will	be.”
	
She	seems	overwhelmed	by	this,	as	well	she	should.	It’s	seldom	advisable	to	look
more	 than	 one	 step	 ahead.	 Even	 the	 step	 after	 the	 next	 will	 always	 appear
ridiculously	impossible.	But	right	now	Jolene	is	staring	at	the	First	Step	and	the	fact
that	she	hasn’t	been	rendered	catatonic	by	the	view	is	a	testament	to	her	honesty	and
resolve.	As	I’ve	pointed	out	before,	this	is	where	people	can	break.
	
“This	is	where	it’s	all	going	anyway.	You	have	this	whole	life;	your	home	and	your
schools	and	community	and	all	that,	everything	you’ve	done,	everything	you	are,
the	future	that	was	laid	out	before	you,	but	all	that	has	to	be	released	for	you	to	go
on.	And	it	will	be.	All	your	choices	have	already	been	made.	You	don’t	choose
whether	to	let	it	all	go,	only	whether	or	not	to	struggle	against	the	process,	and	the
thing	that	makes	an	easier	transition	possible	is	death.	These	false	layers	are	like
your	skin.	It	can	be	torn	away	slowly,	with	excruciating	pain,	or	you	can	just	slough
it	off	like	a	snake,	layer	after	layer,	just	letting	it	all	fall	away.	The	way	to	do	that,	to

=== Page 78 ===
allow	the	process	rather	than	battle	it,	is	to	embrace	your	own	death.	Keep	one	hand
on	your	death	and	fight	your	battles	with	the	other.”
	
“I	don’t	have	any	choice	in	all	this?	I	don’t	have	any	freedom?”
	
“Freedom?	I	don’t	know	what	that	means;	it’s	just	a	concept	word.	Freedom	isn’t	a
thing	itself,	it’s	an	incomplete	idea.	You	have	to	be	free	from	something.	What	do
you	want	to	be	free	from?”
	
“How	about	this	whole	thing?	This	whole	process?	What	if	I	don’t	want	to	do	it?
What	if	I	just	want	to	make	the	whole	thing	stop	and	go	back	to	having	a	normal
life?”
	
I	pause	to	give	her	time	to	breathe.
	
“Okay.”
	
“Okay?	What	does	okay	mean?”
	
“It	means	okay.	Store	this	conversation	for	later.	I’m	not	your	teacher,	you	know.
I’m	 someone	 just	 like	 you,	 except	 I’ve	 already	 finished	 something	 you’re	 just
starting.	If	you	want	to	learn	about	trying	to	turn	back,	try	to	turn	back.”
	
She	releases	a	mighty	sigh.	“I	don’t	know	what	I	want.”
	
“You	want	to	attach,”	I	tell	her.	“That’s	the	urge	that	brought	you	here.	You	want	to
join	up	with	people,	a	group,	be	a	part	of	something,	something	big	and	safe	and
respectable.	 You	 sense	 yourself	 spinning	 off	 into	 oblivion	 and	 you’re	 clawing
desperately	to	grab	ahold	of	something.	This	is	a	very	powerful	urge	and	pretty
much	everyone	succumbs	to	it.	That’s	the	big	trap,	the	one	that	pulls	us	in	and
spares	us	from	the	paradigm	shift,	the	point	of	no	return,	the	First	Step.	Does	this	all
sound	right	to	you?”
	
“I	guess.”
	
I	wait.
	
“Yes.”
	

=== Page 79 ===
This	was	touched	upon	in	Damnedest.	We’re	all	treading	water	in	a	shoreless	sea
and	we	huddle	together	into	groups	to	convince	ourselves	that	our	situation	is	other
than	it	is.	That’s	make-believe.	Serious	people	want	to	confront	the	real	situation.
To	do	that	they	have	to	leave	the	group	and	stop	treading	water,	surrender	to	the
inevitable	rather	than	live	a	life	of	pointless	struggle.	They	have	to	go	off	by
themselves	and	allow	themselves	to	sink.	This	is	the	point	no	one	goes	beyond.	This
is	what	everyone	lives	in	denial	of;	what	they	must,	at	all	costs,	stay	turned	away
from.
	
The	emperor	has	no	clothes.	Obviously.	Anyone	who	opens	their	eyes	and	looks
will	see.	But	for	this	whole	dreamstate	deal	to	work,	people	have	to	see	clothes.	It
doesn’t	matter	what	the	clothes	look	like,	but	they	can’t	see	naked.	This	is	what
Maya	must	work	against;	the	plain	truth.	What	does	she	have	to	do	to	keep	people
from	seeing	the	obvious?
	
Baffle	them	with	bullshit.
	
Judeo-Christian	 bullshit,	 Hindu	 bullshit,	 Buddhist	 bullshit,	 New	 Age	 bullshit,
they’re	all	just	varieties	of	agnosticism	and	they	all	result	in	exactly	same	thing:
Spiritual	Embafflement.
	
It’s	that	simple.	The	emperor	has	no	clothes.	It’s	all	just	make-believe.	When	we
want	to	stop	playing	make-believe,	we	become	serious	people.	Of	course,	everyone
sinks	alone	anyway,	but	the	serious	person	can’t	stand	the	lie	of	pretending	the	sea
isn’t	shoreless	or	that	the	darkness	isn’t	absolute	or	that	death	isn’t	always	a	breath
away.	The	urge	to	attach	is	the	survival	urge;	the	urge	not	to	drown,	not	to	sink	into
the	blackness.
	
I	stop	walking	and	look	at	her.
	
“It’s	natural	to	panic,”	I	say,	“and	that’s	what	you’re	doing	now.	That’s	what	all	this
trying	to	hook	up	is	about.	You’re	in	a	life	or	death	struggle	to	survive	and	my	job	is
to	help	you	die.”
	
“Is	that	what	you’ve	been	doing?	Helping	me	die?”
	
“Indirectly.	I’ve	been	trying	to	help	you	grab	onto	something	so	that	you	can	see	for
yourself	that	it	can’t	be	done.	The	process	works,	it	doesn’t	need	me	or	anyone	else.
Now	you’re	starting	to	see	that	it’s	no	longer	possible	to	attach.	You’re	chasing
mirages	 in	 a	 desert.	 Everything	 you	 try	 to	 grab	 at	 disappears.	 You	 can’t	 grab

=== Page 80 ===
anything	because	there’s	nothing	to	grab.	Maybe	you	think	you	can	grab	onto	me,
but	that	won’t	work	either.	You	want	a	friend?	A	companion?	Let	death	be	your
companion.	That’s	the	one	thing	you	really	have,	the	one	thing	that’s	really	yours,
that	no	one	can	take	away.”
	
Her	expression	is	taut,	her	eyes	locked	on	mine.	No	teary	eyes	or	trembling	lips.	No
young	girl	pout	or	smirk.	A	warrior	is	emerging.	There	will	soon	be	a	power	shift	in
Jolene.	Rebel	forces	will	overthrow	the	old	regime.	A	new	constitution	will	be
imposed	and	the	excesses	and	frivolities	of	the	make-believe	regime	will	be	swept
away.	A	new	government	will	assume	control	and	impose	martial	law	and	a	wartime
constitution	that	has	no	place	for	anything	but	the	machinery	of	destruction.	Identity
will	wither.	Preferences	will	fade.	Relationships	will	be	abandoned.	Love	itself	will
be	forgotten.	That’s	the	First	Step	and,	for	Jolene,	it’s	coming	soon.
	
“You’re	going	to	tough	places.	You’re	in	for	a	whole	different	type	of	life	than	you
see	people	living	around	you.	You’re	getting	a	glimpse	now	of	what	loneliness
looks	like—no,	not	loneliness,	aloneness—and	there’s	plenty	more	ahead.	But	this
too	shall	pass.”
	
She	looks	down	and	nods.	“This	too	shall	pass,”	she	repeats.
	
“The	pain	of	the	transition	will	pass,	not	the	aloneness.	The	aloneness	actually
becomes	very	comfortable.”
	
I	lift	her	chin.	“You	have	to	go	beyond	the	place	where	death	is	a	morbid	and	evil
thing.	It’s	about	liberation,	not	at	the	end	of	life,	but	during,	when	it	matters.	Now.
Look	up.	Look	at	me.	I	am	happy	to	die	at	any	time.	Makes	no	difference	to	me.
Now,	later,	whatever.	I	love	the	fact	of	my	death;	it’s	what	has	made	my	life
possible.	It’s	how	I’ve	known	what	my	life	was	and	what	to	do	with	it.	If	I	knew
that	helicopter	was	going	to	crash	tonight	I’d	step	aboard	with	a	joyous	and	grateful
heart.”
	
We	walk	for	awhile	in	silence.	This	is	heavy	stuff	to	be	sharing	with	a	teenager	who
has	her	whole	life	ahead	of	her	and	shouldn’t	have	to	even	consider	her	own
mortality	for	many	decades,	but	Jolene	isn’t	normal.	She’s	getting	in	on	the	game,
and	the	game	has	rules.
	
“Your	life	will	be	a	war,”	I	tell	her	in	a	soft	tone.	“It	already	is.	People	hate	war
because	they	fear	death,	but	death	is	your	best	and	most	certain	friend.	Not	me,	not
the	Tibetans	or	the	Japanese	or	some	pop	guru	or	coffeehouse	mystic-in-training.

=== Page 81 ===
This	is	what	you	came	here	to	learn.	It	seems	strange	to	lecture	a	beautiful	young
girl	 about	 death,	 but	 you’re	 not	 just	 a	 beautiful	 young	 girl,	 are	 you?	 You’re
something	else.	That’s	what	you’re	finding	out	now,	isn’t	it?”
	
“I	don’t	think	I	can	really	do	it.”
	
“You	are	doing	it.	This	is	it.	One	step	at	a	time.”
	
“I’m	scared,”	she	says.
	
“Of	what?”
	
She	thinks	about	it.	“I	don’t	know.”
	
“Good.	Find	out.	That’s	how	you	know	where	to	go.	Follow	the	fear.	Go	into	it	and
light	it	up.	Inside	your	fear	is	the	next	door,	the	next	thing	holding	you	in.	Let	fear
be	your	guide.”
	
She	wraps	herself	around	my	arm	as	we	continue	to	walk.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
We	go	in	and	sign	some	stuff	as	they	crank	up	the	comfortable	executive	chopper
outside	on	the	pad.	Jolene	sees	that	the	pilot	is	quite	trim,	handsome	and	appears
emotionally	stable.	She’s	thrilled	by	everything,	which	makes	it	thrilling	for	me.
When	 we’re	 standing	 outside	 waiting	 to	 be	 waved	 aboard,	 Jolene	 is	 hanging
comfortably	on	my	arm.	She	tiptoes	up	and	speaks	in	my	ear.	“It’s	such	a	pretty
night,”	she	says.	“I	hope	we	don’t	crash.”
	
I	laugh	and	smile	down	at	her.
	
“No	way	you’re	getting	off	that	easy.”
	
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
	
Bonus	Content	from

=== Page 82 ===
Spiritual	Warfare
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
I,	Witness
	
With	thinking	we	may	be	beside	ourselves	in	a	sane	sense.	By	a	conscious	effort	of
the	mind	we	can	stand	aloof	from	actions	and	their	consequences;	and	all	things,
good	and	bad,	go	by	us	like	a	torrent.	We	are	not	wholly	involved	in	Nature.	I	may
be	either	the	driftwood	in	the	stream,	or	Indra	in	the	sky	looking	down	on	it.	I	may
be	affected	by	a	theatrical	exhibition;	on	the	other	hand,	I	may	not	be	affected	by	an
actual	event	which	appears	to	concern	me	much	more.	I	only	know	myself	as	a
human	entity;	the	scene,	so	to	speak,	of	thoughts	and	affections;	and	am	sensible	of
a	certain	doubleness	by	which	I	can	stand	as	remote	from	myself	as	from	another.
However	intense	my	experience,	I	am	conscious	of	the	presence	and	criticism	of	a
part	of	me,	which,	as	it	were,	is	not	a	part	of	me,	but	spectator,	sharing	no
experience,	but	taking	note	of	it,	and	that	is	no	more	I	than	it	is	you.	When	the	play,
it	may	be	the	tragedy,	of	life	is	over,	the	spectator	goes	his	way.	It	was	a	kind	of
fiction,	a	work	of	the	imagination	only,	so	far	as	he	was	concerned.
	
Henry	David	Thoreau
	
	
It’s	early	evening
,	still	light.	Sheila,	my	hard-up-for-work	local	ex-pat	slash	retired
Social	Studies	teacher	slash	affordable	personal	assistant	slash	humorless	Christian
lady,	has	gone	off	to	make	her	husband	some	dinner.	A	couple	of	other	people	have
come	and	gone.	The	place	is	settling	into	its	evening	groove.
	
Lisa	and	Maggie	appear,	as	they	often	do	around	this	time.	We	all	say	our	hellos	and
I	keep	working	at	my	laptop.	Lisa	relaxes	out	by	the	pool	and	Maggie	takes	a	seat	at
the	table	with	me.	She	starts	pulling	things	out	of	her	student’s	backpack;	water
bottle,	notebook,	pen.	She	goes	to	work	quietly	and	no	one	says	anything	for	half	an
hour	when	Maggie	asks	a	question.
	
“Can	I	have	a	technique?”
	
I	look	up.
	

=== Page 83 ===
“You	don’t	like	the	autolysis?”	I	ask.
	
“Yeah,	I’m	trying	to	do	that.	I	have	an	online	diary	where	I	try	to	do	spiritual	stuff.	I
don’t	think	my	class	will	be	too	thrilled	with	a	diary,	though.	Got	any	others?”
	
“Techniques?”
	
“Yeah.”
	
I’ve	been	waiting	for	someone	to	say	something	so	I	could	take	a	break.	I	save	my
work	and	sit	back.	Maggie	and	I	have	gotten	the	hang	of	each	other	in	the	last
month.	She’s	taken	several	cracks	at	trying	to	interview	me,	but	it	hasn’t	been	going
well.	All	her	questions	manage	to	do	is	demonstrate	that	they	don’t	really	apply	to
me.	That’s	interesting	for	the	first	few,	but	when	it	turns	out	that	the	answer	to	every
question	isn’t	an	answer	but	an	explanation	of	why	the	question	doesn’t	apply,	it
gets	tedious	for	everyone.	Other	questions	would	require	such	long-winded	answers
and	defining	of	terms	as	to	not	be	worth	the	bother.	My	most	common	answer	is
“Try	the	next	one.”	She	has	stuck	with	it	though,	and	keeps	coming	back	to	try	a
different	approach.	She	gets	half	an	hour	a	week	for	this	activity	and,	as	promised,
her	mom,	Lisa,	and	her	grandpa,	Frank,	help	her,	but	so	far	I	don’t	think	she	has
anything	more	exciting	for	her	school	report	than	her	online	autolysis	diary.
	
The	questions	they’ve	come	up	with	so	far	have	been	stock	questions	from	a	variety
of	standard	personality	tests	designed	to	determine	whether	the	respondents	were
depressed,	employable,	addicted,	and	so	forth.	I’ll	provide	a	few	short	samples	here
to	illustrate:
	
Q:	When	you	have	disagreements	with	people,	do	you	raise	your	voice?
	
A:	I	hope	not.	I	live	in	a	state	of	profound	disagreement	with	everyone	about
everything.	I’d	never	stop	screaming.
	
Q:	Do	you	consciously	avoid	people	who	have	problems?
	
A:	Ego	is	the	only	problem	I	recognize	as	such,	and	yes,	I	consciously	avoid	people
who	have	it.
	
Q:	Are	you	proud	of	your	accomplishments?
	

=== Page 84 ===
A:	I	don’t	possess	the	thing	that	experiences	pride.	I’m	satisfied	that	I’ve	performed
my	function	adequately,	that’s	about	it.
	
Q:	Is	there	a	private	side	to	your	thoughts	that	you	don’t	generally	share	with
others?
	
A:	It’s	not	a	side	I	don’t	share	but	the	fuller	natural	expression.	The	awakened	state
could	easily	be	misinterpreted	as	psychotic,	monstrous,	or	evil,	especially	by	the
lazier-minded	 of	 observers.	 The	 real	 monster	 in	 the	 sleeping	 dreamstate	 is	 the
heretic,	so	the	key	to	longevity	in	this	business	is	not	inciting	the	gentle	townsfolk
to	take	up	torches	and	pitchforks	against	you.
	
Q:	Do	you	always	get	your	way?	Sometimes?	Never?
	
A:	Always.	How	things	go	is	how	I	want	them	to	go	and	how	I	want	them	to	go	is
how	they	go.	I	am	in	alignment.
	
Q:	Do	you	like	being	you?
	
A:	I	wouldn’t	if	I	was,	but	I’m	not	so	I	do.
	
There	 were	 dozens	 of	 questions,	 some	 of	 which	 provoked	 long,	 circuitous
responses,	 others	 of	 which	 had	 to	 be	 rejected	 because	 they	 were	 so	 distinctly
inapplicable.	A	few	were	pretty	good,	but	what	it	all	mostly	amounted	to	was	an	in-
depth	look	at	the	awakened	state	and	there’s	no	point	in	detailing	that	to	any	great
degree.	 This	 is	 a	 journey	 to	 be	 taken,	 not	 studied.	 Having	 a	 well-informed
understanding	of	what	fire	looks	and	feels	like	is	kind	of	silly	when	you	can	just	see
it	and	feel	it	for	yourself.
	
I	return	to	Maggie’s	request	for	a	technique.
	
“How	about	witnessing?”	I	ask	her.
	
“Okay,”	she	writes	the	word	down	and	looks	up.	“Witnessing	what?”
	
“Yourself.”
	
“Okay,	how	do	I	do	that?”
	

=== Page 85 ===
“It’s	what	you’re	doing	right	now.	You’re	witnessing	me,	right?	You’re	observing
my	external	character.”
	
“Um,	yes,	I	guess	so.”
	
“Now	do	the	same	thing	but	with	yourself	instead	of	me.”
	
“But	I	can’t	see	me.”
	
“You	can	see	you	from	the	other	side,	the	inside.	Best	seat	in	the	house.”
	
“Oh,”	she	says,	sounding	a	bit	unthrilled.	“Why	is	witnessing	good?”
	
“Is	this	for	your	class	or	for	you?”
	
“I	don’t	know.	Maybe	both.	I	think	me.”
	
“Okay.	Ultimately,	the	only	spiritual	practice	is	observation;	seeing	things	the	way
they	really	are.	That’s	what	Spiritual	Autolysis	is;	a	tool	to	help	us	do	that,	to	see
more	clearly,	to	use	our	brains	the	best	we	can.	In	witnessing,	you	want	to	take	a
step	back	from	yourself	so	you’re	not	just	living	your	life,	you’re	also	observing	it.
Not	in	reflection,	like	a	diary,	but	as	it’s	happening;	in	real	time.	Like	right	now,	I’m
sitting	here	talking	with	you,	but	I’m	also	in	this	witnessing	mode	of	impartial
observer.	I	am	not	fully	in	character,	I’m	also	an	audience	member.	I’m	aware	that
I’m	 acting	 on	 a	 stage	 and	 I	 am,	 somewhat	 disinterestedly,	 monitoring	 my
performance.”
	
She	looks	confused	but	eager.
	
“How	do	I	do	it?”	she	asks.
	
“Well,	in	a	way,	you’re	already	doing	it,	except	your	witness	is	kind	of	unfocused.
She’s	bored,	hungry,	aggravated,	muffled.	You	want	to	bring	her	into	focus,	sit	her
down	and	have	her	pay	attention.”
	
“Her?	Her	who?”
	
“The	little	voice	in	the	back	of	your	mind.	You	know	what	it’s	like	when	you’re
bored,	and	in	the	back	of	your	mind	you’re	thinking	about	something	else?	You’re
not	fully	present,	your	mind	is	somewhere	else;	wandering,	daydreaming.”

=== Page 86 ===
	
“Yes,	I	do	that	all	the	time.”
	
“You’re	not	doing	it	now,	I	hope.”
	
She	giggles.	“No	sir.”
	
“Would	you	tell	me	if	you	were?”
	
She	starts	to	answer	with	an	automatic	denial	but	bites	her	lip	instead.
	
“Maybe	not,”	she	says.
	
“Good.	There	are	two	kinds	of	honesty;	honesty	with	other	people	and	honesty	with
yourself.	 They’re	 separate	 and	 unrelated	 issues.	 Do	 what	 you	 want	 with	 other
people,	but	make	a	special	point	of	trying	to	be	honest	with	yourself.	Okay?”
	
“Okay.”
	
“Daydreaming	is	a	very	good	word	for	it	because	it	suggests	that	we’re	asleep	while
we’re	awake,	which	is	exactly	the	point.	We	want	to	transfer	our	primary	awareness
out	of	the	character	we’re	playing	and	into	the	actor	that’s	playing	the	character.	We
want	to	accentuate	that	distinction	to	help	us	stop	blending	the	character	we	play
with	the	actor	playing	the	character.	We	want	to	take	up	primary	residence	in	the
actor	instead	of	the	character	we’re	portraying.	Does	that	make	sense?”
	
“I	don’t	know.	You	mean	like	being	self-conscious	all	the	time?”
	
“Yes,	but	in	an	impartial	sense,	not	in	a	judgmental	sense.	When	you	have	internal
voices	 holding	 imaginary	 conversations	 or	 worrying	 that	 you	 wore	 the	 wrong
blouse,	those	are	character	elements	too.	The	actor	can	just	sit	back	and	watch	all
that.	In	this	way	you	can	observe	yourself	just	like	you	observe	anyone	else,	except
with	a	better	view.”
	
“I’m	not	sure	I	can	do	that.”
	
“Of	course	you	can,	it	just	sounds	weird.	There’s	nothing	to	it	except	observation,
awareness,	vigilance.	Wakefulness.	First	you	learn	to	do	it,	to	have	this	detached
awareness;	you	do	it	consciously,	a	little	at	a	time,	just	to	get	the	hang	of	it.	Practice
witnessing	 other	 people	 to	 get	 the	 idea.	 Watch	 them,	 wonder	 about	 them,

=== Page 87 ===
deconstruct	and	reverse-engineer	them,	then	just	watch	yourself	the	way	you’ve
been	watching	others.	Then	you	start	doing	it	more	and	more	until	it	becomes
second	nature	and	you’re	almost	always	in	the	witnessing	mode	and	you	see	your
own	character	from	the	same	impersonal	perspective	as	you	see	other	people.”
	
“All	the	time?”
	
“Yes,	but	not	like	a	conscious	effort;	more	like	a	new	way	of	being,	like	always
being	present.	Most	people	you	see	are	just	sleepwalking	through	their	roles,	absent
from	their	own	lives.	They’re	fully	in	character	and	don’t	know	any	other	way.”
	
“Like	straw	dogs?”	she	asks.	“Like	in	the	first	book?”
	
“Exactly,	this	is	how	you	make	that	transition	to	being	in	the	world	but	not	of	the
world,	starting	right	now.	Most	people	never	make	the	distinction	between	actor	and
character.	You	can	see	them,	you	can	look	at	people	and	tell.	If	I	would	have	met
your	mom	a	few	years	ago,	before	her	change	started,	I	would	have	just	seen	her
character.	Now	I	look	at	her	and	I	see	the	person	behind	the	character.	It	doesn’t
mean	she’s	enlightened	or	even	fully	awake	within	the	dreamstate,	it	means	that
she’s	present.”	I	address	myself	to	Lisa,	out	on	the	pool	deck.	“Would	you	agree
with	that?”
	
“Yes,”	she	says.
	
“Understand?”	I	ask	Maggie.
	
“A	little,”	she	says.
	
“By	living	unconsciously,	we	abdicate	our	personal	sovereignty.	That	means	we
give	 responsibility	 for	 ourselves	 away	 to	 other	 people;	 to	 parents	 and	 doctors,
priests	and	gurus,	politicians	and	corporations.	We	institutionalize	ourselves.	We
live	 without	 awareness,	 and	 that’s	 the	 breeding	 ground	 of	 all	 bad	 habits	 and
addictive	behaviors.	When	we	eat	without	awareness,	we	eat	too	much	of	the	wrong
things	and	get	fat	and	unhealthy.	When	we	shop	and	spend	without	awareness,	we
dig	ourselves	into	a	financial	hole	we	might	be	in	for	the	rest	of	our	lives.	We
mindlessly	plop	our	kids	down	in	front	of	a	game	console	or	a	TV	and	the	next	time
we	look	they’re	diabetic	little	blimps.”
	
Maggie	giggles.
	

=== Page 88 ===
“Who’s	to	blame	for	weak,	fat	children?	Unconscious	parents.	Who’s	to	blame	for
unconscious	parents?	Unconscious	parents.	This	cycle	of	unconsciousness	is	deeply
established	 and	 breaking	 the	 cycle,	 as	 your	 mother	 can	 tell	 you,	 can	 be
extraordinarily	difficult.	That’s	what	she	did	when	she	uprooted	you	from	your	old
life;	she	broke	the	cycle.	That’s	a	very	brave	and	difficult	thing	to	do.	We	bury
ourselves	alive	and	if	we	want	to	get	our	lives	back	we	have	to	dig	ourselves	out.
That’s	what	your	mom	is	doing;	digging	herself	out,	breaking	the	cycle.”
	
“Is	mom	going	to	be	enlightened?”
	
“No,	she’s	going	to	be	something	much	better.”
	
She	takes	her	notes	and	stares	at	them	for	a	moment.
	
“Witnessing	sounds	pretty	interesting,	I	guess,”	Maggie	says,	“but	what	does	it
actually	do	for	me?”
	
“Good	girl,	good	question.	First,	it	gets	you	into	the	habit	of	being	alert	and	present
in	your	life,	which	is	a	very	good	habit	to	develop.	If	you	don’t	want	to	sleep	your
life	away	like	most	people	do,	you	have	to	train	yourself	to	wakefulness.	Vigilance
is	the	key.	You	should	be	shifting	from	character	to	actor	many	times	every	hour,	in
all	types	of	situations,	so	that	it	happens	smoothly	and	easily	and	doesn’t	detract
from	your	performance.”
	
Maggie	takes	notes	and	asks	for	clarification	now	and	then.	I	wait	and	proceed
when	she’s	ready.
	
“Second,”	I	say,	“it	trains	you	to	disidentify	from	the	character	you’re	playing.
There’s	a	you	behind	the	character	you	project	out	into	the	world,	and	you	can’t
make	any	progress	as	long	as	you	identify	with	your	stage	persona.	You’re	an	actor
playing	a	character	on	a	stage.	That’s	what	the	Bhagavad-Gita	is	all	about.”
	
“Like	you	talk	about	in	your	books,”	she	says.
	
“That’s	right.	Arjuna	forgot	he	was	just	an	actor	playing	a	character	in	a	play,	and
he	 started	 panicking	 because	 he	 couldn’t	 fulfill	 his	 role.	 Krishna	 was	 like	 the
director	and	he	had	to	come	out	on	stage	and	remind	Arjuna	what	was	going	on,
that	he’s	really	just	an	actor	playing	a	part.”
	
“Lighten	up,	Arjuna,”	she	says	with	a	shy	smile.

=== Page 89 ===
	
“That’s	right.	Arjuna	was	freaking	out.	Krishna	told	him	to	stop	being	such	a	baby.
He	told	Arjuna	to	stand	up	and	fight,	but	what	that	really	means	is	open	your	eyes
and	look.	Krishna	turned	up	the	house	lights	to	show	Arjuna	it	was	all	just	a	play	in
a	theater	so	Arjuna	would	stop	whining	and	play	his	role,	which	he	did,	okay?”
	
“Okay.”
	
“The	third	thing	about	witnessing,	the	most	important	part	and	the	thing	that	most
people	don’t	seem	to	understand,	is	that	you	have	to	take	it	further	than	just	one	step
back.	You	have	to	keep	going	with	it.	It’s	not	a	passive	thing,	like	you	just	sit	back
and	observe.	You	don’t	just	observe	your	character,	you	deconstruct	it.	You	have	to
be	aggressive	about	it.	This	is	a	way	of	simulating	the	enlightened	perspective,
which	would	be	useful	to	anyone	who	wants	to	wake	themselves	up	from	the
dreamstate	instead	of	just	in	it.”
	
She	starts	to	write	and	stops	and	looks	up	at	me.
	
“I	have	no	idea	what	you	just	said,”	she	says.
	
“Okay,	so	we’ve	talked	about	being	awake	and	being	asleep,	right?	The	Dreamstate
Paradigm	and	the	Awakened	Paradigm?”
	
“Yes.”
	
“And	we	talked	about	stepping	back	from	your	character,	observing	the	play	rather
than	being	swept	up	in	it,	right?”
	
“Yes.”
	
“So,	what	would	it	be	like	to	take	another	step	back?”
	
“I	don’t	understand.	How	would	I	take	another	step	back?”
	
“Well,	describe	the	person	you	are.	The	actor,	not	the	character.”
	
“I	don’t	know,”	she	says.	“I’m	a	girl,	I’m	thirteen,	I’m	American.”
	
“Keep	going.”
	

=== Page 90 ===
“Where?”
	
“You’re	a	human	being,	right?	You’re	alive,	conscious,	subject	to	physical	laws.
You	exist	somewhere	specific	in	time	and	space.	You’re	living	on	a	little	planet	in	a
big	galaxy	in	an	infinite	universe.	These	are	all	aspects	of	who	you	believe	yourself
to	be;	these	are	your	beliefs.	So	are	all	the	things	you	think	you’re	not;	you’re	not
this	table,	but	you	believe	there	is	a	table.	You’re	not	this	air,	you’re	not	me,	you’re
not	this	solar	system.	That’s	part	of	the	way	you	define	yourself	as	well;	as	this,	not
that.”
	
“Are	you	saying	I	am	this	table?”
	
“No,	 I’m	 saying	 you’re	 saying	 you’re	 not.	 You	 believe	 you	 and	 the	 table	 are
different	things.”
	
“Aren’t	we?”
	
“I	don’t	know,	are	you?”
	
She	frowns	at	me.
	
“Oh	boy,”	she	says,	tongue	protruding	in	thought.	“Okay,	hold	on	a	second,”	she
rapidly	scribbles	her	notes.
	
“You	said	you’re	a	girl,”	I	continue,	“but	is	that	true	or	is	it	just	a	facet	of	your	role?
You	can	step	back	from	your	gender	and	your	nationality	and	your	species	and
observe	it	the	same	way	we	talked	about	doing	with	your	character.”
	
“I	can?”
	
“Everything	you	think	you	know	about	yourself,	no	matter	how	real	or	true	it	might
seem,	is	just	another	layer	of	costume.	This	is	where	we	start	dismantling	our	true
belief	system.	Belief	isn’t	just	about	God	and	afterlife,	it’s	about	everything	we
think	we	know	is	true.	Everything	we	know,	no	matter	how	sure	we	are,	is	really
just	belief,	and	all	beliefs	are	self-limiting	and	serve	to	reduce	the	truly	infinite	to
the	falsely	finite.”
	
She	gets	that	down	word	for	word.
	
“Oh	boy,”	she	frowns,	“and	what’s	wrong	with	that	again?”

=== Page 91 ===
	
“I	didn’t	say	there	was	anything	wrong	with	it.”
	
“But	none	of	it	is	true,	like	where	we	are	in	time	and	space	and	everything?”
	
“Not	just	where	you	are	in	time	and	space,	but	time	and	space	themselves,	and
duality	and	causality	and	destiny	and	memory	and	anything	else	you	can	think	of.
These	are	the	things	you	believe	are	true,	elements	of	the	Dreamstate	Paradigm,	and
you	can	use	this	witnessing	process	to	shake	that	belief	loose,	get	free	of	it.	Step
back	from	the	year,	the	decade,	the	millennium.	Step	back	from	your	house,	your
town,	 your	 country,	 your	 planet.	 Wherever	 you	 find	 something	 that	 you	 think
defines	or	contains	you	in	some	way,	you	can	step	back	from	it;	clinically	observe
your	belief,	your	attachment.	It’s	all	just	layers	of	dreamstuff.	You	can	stand	outside
all	these	things	and	observe	them	just	like	you	do	with	your	outward	character.”
	
“Can	you	give	an	example?”	she	asks.
	
“Sure,”	I	say.	“Do	you	ever	watch	the	news	on	TV?”
	
“Yes,	sometimes,	for	school	and	stuff.	I	like	it.”
	
“Well,	when	you	watch	the	news,	you	can	look	at	it	like	it’s	last	week’s	news,	or	last
year’s,	even	though	it’s	today’s	news.”
	
She	stares	at	me	and	chews	on	her	pen.
	
“Yeah,”	she	agrees,	“and	why?”
	
“To	detach,	to	focus	your	mind	and	vision	on	false	attachments,	to	stop	seeing
what’s	not.”
	
She	writes	that	down.	When	she	finishes	I	give	her	more	to	write.
	
“To	distance	yourself	from	local	and	national	and	world	events,	to	see	them	as
abstractions,	no	more	personal	to	you	than	if	they	occurred	in	a	different	time	or	a
different	land,	or	on	a	different	planet,	even	though	they	might	be	happening	right
outside	your	window.”
	
She	writes,	pauses,	writes	more,	stops	and	looks	up.
	

=== Page 92 ===
“To	help	you	see	your	false	idea	about	your	localized	nature,	to	pull	up	the	anchor
that	 holds	 you	 in	 this	 place	 and	 time.	 That	 anchor	 is	 just	 another	 emotional
attachment,	just	like	any	other.”
	
As	she	writes,	she	shakes	her	head	back	and	forth.	She	doesn’t	understand	this	stuff
now,	but	she’s	writing	it	down	so	she	doesn’t	have	to.	She	can	process	it	and	ask
follow-ups	at	another	session	if	she	wants.
	
She	finishes	writing	and	looks	to	see	if	I	have	more.
	
“To	pull	yourself	out	of	that	part	of	your	character	that	believes	today’s	news	is
more	significant	than	yesterday’s.	That’s	an	easy	belief	to	see	through.	The	news	is
like	a	snapshot	of	a	river.	It’s	instantly	obsolete.	Ultimately,	everything	you	think
you	know	is	really	just	something	you	believe.	This	is	how	you	can	dig	down
through	your	layers	of	belief;	peel	away	the	veils	of	delusion.	And	like	I	said,	it’s
really	nothing	more	than	observing;	seeing	what	is	by	learning	to	unsee	what’s	not.”
	
“I	know	that	I	am.	That’s	what	you	said,	right?	I	can’t	be	wrong	about	that,	can	I?”
	
“You	exist,	that’s	all	you	know.	Ultimately,	the	actor	has	no	qualities	at	all	except
being.	Not	God	or	Jesus	or	Buddha	can	say	more	than	that.”
	
“But	isn’t	this	all	just	make-believe?”
	
“That’s	the	point.	All	these	layers	that	contain	and	define	you	are	the	make-believe
part.	All	you	have	to	do	is	stop	making	the	belief.	We	don’t	do	that	by	making	new
beliefs	but	by	unmaking	old	ones,	by	seeing	these	attachments	and	beliefs	and	false
aspects	of	self	clearly.	Whenever	we	are	able	to	actually	do	that,	to	see	clearly,	we
break	the	attachment.	That’s	how	attachments	are	severed,	by	lighting	them	up,
focusing	the	mind	on	them.	They	can’t	survive	that.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Maggie	turns	to	her	mother,	who	is	lounging	by	the	pool.
	
“Is	this	what	you’re	doing,	mom?”
	
“I’m	not	sure,”	says	Lisa.	“I	think	there’s	a	pretty	big	difference	between	doing	it	as
an	exercise	and	doing	it	for	real.	Just	taking	one	little	step	is	so	difficult	that	it’s
seems	impossible	to	think	past	it.	And	I’m	not	talking	about	things	like	gender	or

=== Page 93 ===
nationality,	I	just	mean	thin	layers	of	self-image,	like	dependable	woman	and	good
wife.	And,	I	have	to	admit,	I’m	doing	it	selectively.	Trying	to,	anyway.”
	
“Maybe	it	would	have	been	different	for	you	if	you	had	learned	to	do	witnessing
when	you	were	young,”	suggests	Maggie.
	
“If	 someone	 had	 spoken	 to	 me	 like	 Mr.	 McKenna	 is	 speaking	 to	 you	 now,
explaining	the	difference	between	character	and	actor,	I	might	not	have	ever	gotten
so	firmly	set	in	my	ways.	I	think	I	would	have	developed	very	differently	and
wouldn’t	be	in	this	period	of	major	correction	right	now.”
	
“Do	you	think	this	is	something	I	should	do	personally?”
	
Lisa	sighs.	“I	can’t	see	anything	wrong	with	being	more	aware,	honey.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“And	where	are	you	in	all	this?”	Maggie	asks	me.
	
“Good	question.	You	know	all	these	layers	we’ve	discussed,	from	the	character
sitting	here	talking	to	you	all	the	way	back	through	duality	and	time	and	space?”
	
“Yes.”
	
“To	be	awake	means	you’re	not	fooled	by	any	of	that.	No	layers.	Awake	from	the
dream.”
	
“Not	even	destiny?”
	
“Not	even	destiny.”
	
“But	how	do	you	know	it	wasn’t	your	destiny	to	become	enlightened?”
	
“Another	good	question.	I	don’t.	I	have	no	knowledge	on	the	subject.	I	emerged
from	the	dreamstate	into	the	awakened	state,	so	who	knows	what	factors	played	a
role?	And,	frankly,	who	cares?	A	leaf	rushes	on	a	stream	and	comes	to	rest	on	a
rock.	So?	It	doesn’t	make	explanations.	What	does	it	care	how	it	got	there	or	where
its	going	next?”
	

=== Page 94 ===
“But	you	can’t	go	from	the	dreamstate	into	the	awakened	state	and	still	have	your
ego?”
	
“It	would	be	easier	for	a	camel	to	pass	through	the	eye	of	a	needle	than	for	the	false-
self	to	pass	into	the	awakened	state.”
	
“But	what	does	that	leave?”
	
“The	logical	impossibility	of	a	selfless	self;	an	egoless	entity.	As	you	see,	I	am	still
here	in	the	physical	world,	subject	to	physical	laws,	but	that’s	just	this	body	and	this
character.	The	actor	is	having	none	of	it.	It	would	even	be	more	accurate	to	say	the
actor	is	dead.”
	
“Dead?”
	
“If	a	person	is	dead	but	their	body	is	still	walking	around,	they’re	a	zombie.	If	a
person	is	dead	but	their	body	and	personality	are	still	walking	around,	they’re
enlightened.	I	know	that	doesn’t	seem	to	make	any	sense,	but	that	doesn’t	give	me
any	latitude	in	how	I	represent	it.	It	makes	perfect	sense	to	me,	and	to	anyone	else
in	the	awakened	state.”
	
She’s	shaking	her	head	as	she	takes	her	notes.
	
“What?”	I	ask.
	
“I	don’t	think	I	can	tell	my	class	that.”
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
The	New	World
	
All	deep,	earnest	thinking	is	but	the	intrepid	effort	of	the	soul	to	keep	the	open
independence	of	her	sea,	while	the	wildest	winds	of	heaven	and	earth	conspire	to
cast	her	on	the	treacherous,	slavish	shore.
	
Herman	Melville
	
	

=== Page 95 ===
It	would	be	two	weeks
	after	the	motorcycle	accident	before	Maya	and	I	were	able
to	resume	our	nightly	visits	to	Frank’s	poolside	for	a	drink	and	a	cigar.	I	was	able	to
take	her	for	short	walks	within	a	few	days	of	spilling	the	bike—a	cane	in	my	left
hand	and	a	long	plastic	tennis	ball	picker-upper-and-chucker	gizmo	in	my	right—
but	I	was	advised	against	too	much	too	soon.
	
I	used	the	opportunity	to	take	advantage	of	the	estate’s	home	theater	and	enormous
collection	of	movies.	The	owner	of	the	house,	because	of	who	he	was	in	the	music
world,	seemed	to	get	comp’d	a	copy	of	everything	put	out	by	the	major	distributors;
both	movies	and	music.	I	thought	it	would	be	no	problem	to	settle	in	to	such	a
beautifully	appointed	and	technologically	sophisticated	room	for	a	week	or	two	and
just	watch	movies	and	musical	performances,	but	it	got	old	in	the	first	hour.
	
Reading	books,	watching	movies	and	TV,	listening	to	music;	these	might	seem	like
passive	activities,	but	they’re	not.	We	have	to	bring	something	to	them.	It’s	not	all
take	and	no	give.	We	need	to	make	a	connection;	a	participatory	bargain	must	be
struck	and	kept.	If	we	don’t	supply	the	emotions,	they’re	not	there.	If	we	don’t
bridge	the	gap,	no	connection	gets	made.	This	is	true	of	everything	external	to	us
with	which	we	form	connections,	of	course,	but	for	me,	most	everything	else	had
already	fallen	away.	I	was	kind	of	hoping	escapist	movies	and	music	and	pointless
books	would	continue	to	amuse	me	for	a	few	more	years,	but—
	
“You’re	not	saying	all	movies	and	books	are	pointless,	are	you?”	asks	Lisa,	reading
over	my	shoulder.	“Hey,”	she	says,	“stop	that!	Stop	typing	what	I’m	saying—	Hey!”
	
She	laughs	and	busies	herself	with	papers	and	filling	glasses	and	tidying	up	before
taking	her	usual	seat	at	the	end	of	the	table.
	
I’m	a	task-specific	person.	Everything	I	do	is	either	about	the	books,	like	reading,
writing,	and	walking,	or	it’s	down-time,	like	eating	and	sleeping.	I’ve	discussed	this
with	Lisa	and	she	agrees	that	it’s	unusual	but	not	unheard	of.	I	asked	her	if	she
knew	anyone	like	that	and	she	said	no,	everyone	she’s	known	has	always	been	off	in
a	 hundred	 different	 directions,	 but	 that	 she	 imagined	 there	 must	 be	 intensely
focused	people	in	any	given	field;	in	the	arts,	in	science	and	exploration,	in	sports,
in	business.	Especially	spirituality,	she	muses,	citing	several	varieties	of	renunciate
and	vow-taker	to	make	her	point.
	
I	agreed	with	her,	except	I’m	not	passionate	or	even	very	focused.	I	tend	more
toward	the	lackadaisical	end	of	the	task-specific	spectrum.	The	movies	I	like	aren’t
the	movies	I	like,	they’re	the	movies	that	serve	the	books.	
Vanilla	Sky
	and	
Abre	Los

=== Page 96 ===
Ojos
,	
The	Matrix
	and	
The	Thirteenth	Floor
,	
Pleasantville
,	
Joe	vs	the	Volcano
,	
The
Graduate
	and	
About	Schmidt
;	these	are	some	of	my	favorite	movies,	but	I	wouldn’t
actually	care	to	watch	any	of	them.	They’re	favorites	because	I	appreciate	them	on
the	level	of	parable.	They’re	useful	for	communicating	because	everyone	is	familiar
with	them,	or	easily	could	be.	What	are	my	personal	movie	favorites?	That’s	the
point,	I	guess.	I	don’t	have	any.	There	is	no	person	to	have	personal	preferences,
there’s	only	the	task-specific	person	to	have	task-specific	preferences.
	
Books?	Same	thing.	
Moby-Dick
,	
Leaves	of	Grass
,	
1984
,	
Walden
	and	few	others
might	be	reckoned	my	favorites,	but	I	don’t	own	physical	copies	of	them	and
wouldn’t	pick	them	off	the	shelf	if	I	did.	I’ve	made	a	small	effort	recently	to	reread
some	 Kerouac,	 Bukowski,	 Dostoevsky,	 Solzhenitsyn,	 Hamsun,	 and	 Camus,	 but
instead	of	reading	for	pleasure,	it	feels	more	like	I’m	searching	for	something	for
my	own	books—the	next	
Moby-Dick
	or	
1984
	maybe—though	I	don’t	expect	to	find
it.
	
What’s	the	point?	Why	am	I	telling	you	this?	It’s	something	I’ve	been	saying	since
the	first	book	and	it’s	something	that	anyone	interested	in	these	books	would	want
to	understand	about	the	awakened	state.	This	receding	out	of	being	isn’t	poetic	or
spiritual	or	blissful.	Nor	is	it	not.	Jed	McKenna,	the	character,	has	been	zeroing	out
for	more	than	twenty	years	and	is	now	nearly	nullified.	It’s	like	being	a	hundred
years	old.	It’s	not	my	world	anymore,	even	though	I’m	still	in	it.	It’s	not	my	life
anymore,	even	though	I’m	still	living	it.	And,	as	with	a	hundred	year-old	man,
there’s	nothing	on	the	horizon.	There’s	nothing	to	hope	for,	nothing	to	look	forward
to,	and	nothing	can	happen	to	improve	the	situation.	If	I	won	the	lottery,	cured
cancer	and	married	a	supermodel,	things	wouldn’t	be	looking	any	better.	Happily,	I
don’t	find	my	situation	disagreeable.	I	don’t	wish	it	to	be	other	than	it	is.	It’s	natural
and	comfortable	and	fine.
	
Maybe	there	are	other	folks	writing	other	books	that	talk	about	this	part	of	things,
about	the	living	reality	of	the	truth-realized	state,	of	what	it’s	like	for	the	first	two
years,	the	first	ten	years,	what	it’s	like	after	twenty	years.	Maybe	there	are	such
books;	I	haven’t	looked	in	a	long	time.	I	know	of	some,	but	they’re	junked	up	with
so	much	God-Love-Beauty-Peace	crap	that	you	have	to	scrape	it	off	with	a	stick.
This	is	a	featureless,	unadorned,	undivided	state	and	should	be	related	as	such.
There’s	nothing	to	be	said	in	favor	of	it	except	that	it’s	not	a	lie.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	

=== Page 97 ===
One	thing	that	has	surprised	me	recently	was	a	kind	of	friendship	I	struck	up	with
Lisa’s	 dad,	 Frank.	 He’s	 a	 big,	 gruff,	 no-nonsense	 kind	 of	 guy,	 at	 least	 on	 the
exterior.	Inside	he’s	like	a	modern	Richard	Maurice	Bucke;	a	spiritual	romantic	with
a	 vision	 of	 humanity’s	 future	 that’s	 both	 tantalizingly	 possible	 and	 laughably
improbable.	He	introduced	himself	to	me	via	e-mail.	He	began	with	his	academic
credentials,	which	were	impressive.	He	then	spent	a	few	paragraphs	saying	nice
things	about	me	and	Damnedest	and	Incorrect	and	explaining	that	he	was	retired
now,	a	recent	widower,	and	going	a	little	batty	and	hoped	that	he’d	found	in	me
someone	with	whom	he	could	discuss	ideas	he’d	been	formulating	since	the	early
sixties	but	to	which	he	could	not	give	full	expression	during	his	academic	career.
	
That	was	almost	the	end	of	it	right	there.	I	don’t	correspond	much.	People	who	take
this	stuff	seriously	have	no	need	of	me	or	anyone	else,	only	of	finding	the	next
question,	of	taking	the	next	step,	of	finding	the	next	enemy	and	fighting	the	next
battle.	People	who	don’t	take	this	stuff	seriously	are	invariably	looking	for	ways	to
occupy	and	distract	themselves	so	they	don’t	have	to	take	any	real	steps	or	fight	any
real	battles.	No	one	needs	my	help	with	that,	and	they	won’t	have	any	trouble
finding	 plenty	 of	 help	 elsewhere.	 Modern	 spirituality	 in	 all	 its	 forms	 exists	 to
facilitate	spiritual	inertia:	the	tendency	of	a	seeker	at	rest	to	stay	at	rest.	I	made	a
deal	with	the	universe	at	the	earliest	stages	of	this	project	that	I	wouldn’t	let	myself
get	dragged	into	all	that	personal	drama	and	spiritual	escapism,	and	we’ve	always
understood	each	other	very	clearly	on	that	point.
	
But	once	in	a	while	something	finds	a	way	through	to	me,	as	with	Frank.	I	was
browsing	through	my	electronic	archives,	and	there	was	his	name	in	the	From
column	again	and	again.	His	name	stuck	in	my	head	and	I	eventually	began	reading
his	e-mails	to	see	why	this	man	had	written	to	me	thirty-one	times.
	
Once	I	started	reading	Frank’s	e-mails,	the	first	of	them	dating	back	more	than	a
year,	several	features	became	apparent	and	confirmed	for	me	that	he	was	meant	to
play	a	role	in	the	third	book	and	that	I	should	accept	his	standing	invitation	to	visit
his	home	in	Mexico	and	make	use	of	his	library.	One	was	his	mention	of	the	crisis
his	 daughter	 was	 in,	 which	 had	 some	 connection	 to	 Damnedest	 and	 Incorrect.
Another	was	his	references	to	Orwell’s	1984	which	I	had	just	read	three	or	four
times	in	the	previous	month	with	almost	as	much	pleasure	as	I	had	read	Moby-Dick
a	few	years	earlier.	1984	may	be	the	searing	indictment	of	political	oppression	or
the	 cautionary	 tale	 about	 personal	 privacy	 most	 people	 take	 it	 for—
yeahsurefinewhatever—but	like	Moby-Dick,	the	book	functions	elegantly	at	the
much	more	interesting	level	of	freedom	versus	bondage,	of	truth	versus	delusion,	of
man	versus	Maya.

=== Page 98 ===
	
We	pick	up	here	at	the	point	where	Frank	gets	to	the	point.
	
We	humans,	Mr.	McKenna,	are	of	two	minds	–	Finite	Mind	and	Infinite	Mind.	We
are,	more	accurately,	infinite	beings	with	the	capacity	to	live	and	function	in	a	finite
mode.
	
Man’s	situation,	in	broad	overview,	is	that	we	have	entirely	abandoned	Infinite
Mind	and	taken	up	exclusive	residence	in	Finite	Mind,	something	akin	to	moving
out	of	Versailles	and	into	cardboard	box,	though	the	actual	extremes	are	much
further	apart,	more	like	abandoning	heaven	in	favor	of	hell.	In	fact,	exactly	like
that.	We	are	self-exiles,	cast	out	of	the	garden.	We	are	the	fallen	angels.	Man	is	his
own	Lucifer	and	the	world	is	his	hell.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
I’m	going	to	digress	for	a	few	paragraphs	now.
	
Biblical	references	trigger	in	me	a	nearly	automatic	reaction	to	reject	what	I’m
reading	and	move	on;	a	mental	gag	reflex	of	sorts.	Actually,	citing	anyone	or
anything	as	authority	strikes	me	as	an	automatic	disqualifier.	I	like	to	use	quotations
and	excerpts	in	support	of	points	I’m	making,	but	never	to	be	believed	or	relied
upon	or	trusted	as	sources	of	authority.	The	only	authority	is	one’s	own	judgment
and	one’s	own	powers	of	reason	and	comprehension.	To	defer	to	authority	is	to	try
to	skip	a	step,	and	no	such	thing	is	possible.	There	is	nothing	we	need	to	understand
that	we	can’t	understand	for	ourselves.	We	need	not	abdicate	our	self-sovereignty	to
any	other	individual	or	book	or	institution.	Nothing	we	need	is	withheld	or	beyond
us,	and	no	one	has	ever	skipped	a	single	step.
	
The	 dogma	 and	 ideology	 of	 our	 upbringing	 are	 particularly	 pernicious	 in	 this
regard.	They	color	and	shape	our	thoughts	to	a	much	greater	degree	than	we	can
possibly	be	aware.	Spiritual	aspirants	of	any	background	may	feel	confident	that
they	have	rejected	and	moved	past	the	indoctrination	of	their	youth,	but	this	is	far
more	easily	said	than	done.
	
Anyone	can	rearrange	the	surface	of	their	persona	however	and	whenever	they	wish
—change	 clothes	 and	 hair,	 change	 name	 and	 address,	 change	 nationality	 and
religion—but	change	that	occurs	on	the	surface	is	merely	cosmetic.	It’s	like	painting
a	house	a	different	color	and	calling	it	a	different	house.	It’s	not.	It’s	the	same
house,	the	same	structure,	the	same	foundation,	just	a	different	color.	We	can	add

=== Page 99 ===
ornamentation,	drape	it	in	fabric,	redo	the	landscaping,	but	it	makes	no	substantive
difference.	If	we	want	it	to	be	a	different	house,	we	have	to	tear	it	down,	demolish
the	foundation,	cart	off	the	debris,	and	start	anew.
	
The	question	is	often	asked:	Can	a	person	really	change?	The	answer	is	yes,	and	this
is	how;	demolish	and	rebuild.	Die	and	be	reborn.	This	is	the	only	way.	We	can	sit	in
therapy	or	meditation	for	decades	and	be	the	same	person	we	were	when	we	started.
We	can	read	every	self-help	book,	subscribe	to	every	magazine,	join	every	group,
take	every	course,	make	every	effort,	but	if	it’s	still	the	same	structure	and	the	same
foundation,	then	it	doesn’t	matter	how	we	change	our	outward	appearance	and
behavior,	we’re	still	the	same	person.
	
Real	change	happens	far	below	the	surface,	at	normally	unplumbed	and	unsuspected
depths,	and	not	until	we	have	traveled	inward	and	downward	to	those	depths	of	self
can	we	make	any	claim	at	self-understanding	or	self-mastery.	Until	we	make	that
journey,	 we	 are	 completely	 subject	 to	 unseen	 forces,	 like	 bobbing	 corks	 on	 a
surging	 sea,	 but	 we	 don’t	 make	 that	 journey	 because	 it’s	 easier	 to	 convince
ourselves	that	it’s	our	bobbing	motion	that	causes	the	sea	to	surge.
	
Vanity.
	
End	of	digression.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
In	Frank’s	case,	I’m	glad	I	rode	out	the	biblical	references	because,	through	the
course	of	thirty-one	e-mails,	he	would	paint	a	very	intriguing	picture	of	an	alternate
reality	 for	 all	 mankind	 that	 he	 called,	 only	 half	 in	 jest,	 the	 New	 World	 and
sometimes,	New	America.	And	although	he	knew	it	would	never	come	to	pass	and
was	not	optimistic	about	man’s	future,	he	was	also	kind	enough	to	provide	not	only
a	map	to	New	America,	but	the	vehicle	by	which	everyone	could	get	there,	albeit	an
infamous	and	much	maligned	vehicle.
	
Somehow,	everything	has	become	flipped	upside	down.	Not	knowing	of	anything
better,	we	have	elevated	the	banalities	of	physical	survival	to	the	summit	of	human
experience	–	eating,	drinking,	sensual	pleasures,	sex	and	mating,	gathering	–	what
pathetic	consolations	they	are!	Wealth,	power,	prestige	–	such	words	would	not	even
appear	in	the	vocabulary	of	a	society	of	Whole	Beings,	but	for	us	Halflings,	they’re
all	we	have.
	

=== Page 100 ===
Too	much?	Do	I	exaggerate?	I	challenge	you	to	read	on,	Mr.	McKenna,	and	see	if
you	don’t	find	yourself	in	full	agreement	with	me.
	
There	were	two	things	in	Frank’s	first	e-mails	that	caught	my	attention.	The	first
was	his	assertion	that	everyone	is	wrong	about	everything	all	the	time.	This	is	a
message	that	strikes	a	chord	with	me.	It	sounds	really	bad,	but	it’s	actually	really
good.	It	means	there	aren’t	millions	of	things	wrong,	just	one,	right	at	the	source,
and	everything	else	that	appears	wrong	stems	from	that	single	core	error.	It	may	not
seem	like	it,	but	that’s	a	very	pro-human,	optimistic	point	of	view,	and	I’m	in	full
agreement.
	
Another	thing	Frank	would	say	in	his	first	few	e-mails	that	caught	me,	and	which
was	at	the	heart	of	his	overall	message,	was	that	we	can	all	be	Buddhas,	now.
	
Well,	real	soon,	anyway.	And	he	wasn’t	kidding.
	
That	works	for	me	too.	Spiritual	elitism	in	any	form	is	an	unmistakable	symptom	of
blind-leading-the-blind	syndrome.	All	we	are	is	consciousness.	To	suggest	that	one
being	 could	 be	 superior	 or	 inferior	 to	 another	 is	 to	 reveal	 complete	 ignorance
regarding	the	simplest	of	matters.	There	are	no	second-tier	people,	and	no	informed
spiritual	teaching	or	religion	would	ever	suggest	that	anyone	could	ultimately	be
superior	or	inferior	to	another.
	
But	that’s	not	what	Frank	meant.	He	wasn’t	saying	we’re	all	equal	in	consciousness.
He	was	saying	we	could	all	be	Buddhas.	Now.	That’s	a	helluva	thing	to	say.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Finite	Mind	is	really	nothing	more	than	the	intelligence	of	a	physical	life	support
system	that	allows	us	to	experience	and	explore	Infinite	Mind	from	the	outside
looking	in.	Experiencing	and	exploring	Infinite	Mind	is	our	meaning	and	purpose.
	
Finite	 Mind	 keeps	 the	 body	 alive	 and	 safe.	 It’s	 necessary	 for	 survival	 and
reproduction,	but	survival	and	reproduction	to	what	end?	Survival	and	reproduction
for	the	sake	of	more	survival	and	reproduction?	That	seems	absurd,	but	that	is
exactly	the	story	of	man	so	far.	All	we	are	doing	is	treading	water,	marching	in
place.
	
It	doesn’t	have	to	be	that	way	and	those	who	have	looked,	(there	are	many,	as	you
will	see),	have	seen	that	it’s	not	meant	to	be.	We	are	living	empty	lives,	yes	sir,	but

=== Page 101 ===
we	are	doing	so	in	error,	and	it’s	an	error	that	can	be	corrected.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“He’s	 a	 bit	 of	 a	 crackpot,	 I’m	 afraid,”	 says	 Lisa	 after	 reading	 the	 first	 few
paragraphs.
	
“Yes,”	I	agree,	“he’s	referred	to	himself	at	various	times	as,”	I	refer	to	my	notes,	“a
cheerful	 crackpot,	 a	 toothless	 insurgent,	 an	 armchair	 revolutionary,	 a	 passive
radical,	and	a	pragmatic	utopian.”
	
Lisa	picks	up	the	next	page	and	continues	reading	her	father’s	words.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Finite	Mind	is	an	integral	part	of	the	equation	of	Finite	and	Infinite	–	the	Yin	and
Yang	of	the	sentient	being	–	but	that’s	not	what	we	have.	We	are	all	Yin	and	no	Yang.
We	are	flat,	lifeless	facsimiles	of	the	beings	we	are	meant	to	be.	It’s	not	a	mere	piece
that	we’re	missing,	it’s	an	entire	dimension,	the	critical	dimension,	that	we	lack.
When	half	is	missing,	the	other	half	becomes	the	new	whole,	which	is	a	different
being	entirely	–	a	Halfling.
	
We	do	everything	in	our	power	to	deny	the	reality	of	our	situation.	We	strain	reason
and	credulity	to	deny	and	rationalize	our	condition	rather	than	acknowledging	it
and	correcting	it.
	
In	 the	 simplest	 terms,	 we	 are	 all	 meant	 to	 be	 Buddhas,	 and	 we	 all	 can	 be	 –
everyone.	And	this	corrupt,	misbegotten,	hellish	earth	can	become	a	paradise	–
now.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“Aw	geez,”	groans	Lisa.	“Is	my	dad	nuts?”
	
“If	he	is,	then	I	am	too.”
	
“Great,	the	two	most	important	men	in	my	life	at	this	critical	juncture	are	both
certifiable.	Are	you	going	to	put	this	material	in	the	book?”
	
“Do	you	know	what	he’s	getting	at?”

=== Page 102 ===
	
“I	have	no	idea.	He’s	been	into	a	lot	of	weird	stuff,	that	was	his	big	thing	as	a
teacher.	I’m	afraid	it	sounds	a	little	like	New	Age	mysticism	or	something.”
	
“Kind	 of.	 Mysticism	 for	 the	 masses.	 Every	 man,	 woman	 and	 child	 a	 Buddha.
Cosmic	consciousness.	A	new	society	emerging	from	the	ashes	of	this	one.	That’s
what	he’s	talking	about.”
	
“Oh	God.	Seriously,	are	you	guys	both	crazy?”
	
“It’s	just	hypothetical.”
	
“But	he’s	saying	it	could	happen.”
	
“Oh	yeah,	definitely.	It	won’t,	but	it	theoretically	could.	That’s	what	makes	it	fun.
Neither	of	us	are	thinking	about	this	as	something	that’s	really	going	to	happen,	like
activists	or	crusaders	or	something.	More	like	two	guys	hollering	big,	sprawling
ideas	across	a	pond	at	each	other.	It’s	like	trying	to	figure	out	what	the	world	would
be	like	today	if	the	revolution	hadn’t	been	defeated.”
	
“There	was	a	revolution?”	She	looks	up	at	me.	“What	revolution?”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
The	current	state	of	humans	on	earth	is,	compared	to	what	it	could	and	should	be,	a
state	of	being	far	more	terrible	than	any	writer	ever	has	or	ever	will	portray.	We
can	look	at	the	dystopian	visions	of	Huxley,	Zamyatin,	Orwell,	Burgess,	Rand,
Bradbury	and	others,	and	think	about	how	good	we	have	it	compared	to	how	bad	it
could	be,	but	when	we	adopt	a	view	that	encompasses	our	full	potential,	it	becomes
painfully	clear	that	no	dystopian	vision	has	ever	been	imagined	that	rivals	our	very
own	reality	for	inescapable	nightmarish	horror.	Emerson	was	right	when	he	said
man	is	a	god	in	ruins,	and	what	could	be	more	horrible	than	that?	We	are	our	own
worst	case	scenario.	It	is	only	our	ignorance	that	shields	us,	but	it	is	that	very
shield	of	ignorance	that	imprisons	us.	Sound	familiar,	Mr.	McKenna?
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
I	show	Lisa	the	folder	containing	hardcopies	of	the	e-mails	her	father	sent	me.
	
“Jesus,”	she	says,	“he’s	really	pulling	out	all	the	stops.”

=== Page 103 ===
	
“I	think	he’s	had	this	building	up	in	him	for	forty	years.	It	seems	like	all	his	various
interests	over	the	years	kind	of	drove	him	to	this	ultimate	conclusion.	It’s	really	too
over-the-top	for	any	sort	of	academic	usage,	of	course,	but	now	he’s	stumbled	onto
me	and	he	can	spill	out	his	whole	crazy	theory	to	someone	who’ll	appreciate	it.”
	
“And	publish	it.”
	
“That’s	always	been	the	plan.”
	
She	looks	up.
	
“Always?”
	
“Sure,	the	third	book	can’t	ignore	this	material.	From	my	perspective,	your	father	is
just	the	ride.	I	was	going	to	take	the	trip	anyway.”
	
“So	his	ideas	aren’t	new	to	you?”
	
“There’s	really	only	one	idea;	one	problem	and	one	solution.”
	
“And	the	problem	is?”
	
“That	we	assume	we’re	whole	beings	when	we’re	only—”
	
“Halflings,”	she	says.
	
“Half,	yes,	and	not	the	good	half.	Your	father	spent	years	tracing	all	the	faults	of
mankind	 back	 to	 their	 source	 and	 was	 finally	 forced	 to	 an	 unbelievable	 yet
undeniable	conclusion.	I	came	at	it	differently.	I	started	at	the	unbelievable	yet
undeniable	conclusion	and	worked	outward.	The	idea	that	everyone	is	wrong	about
everything	all	the	time	is	something	I’m	very	comfortable	with;	it’s	the	essential
nature	of	the	dreamstate.	Your	father	took	a	long	time	to	be	able	to	see	it,	but	for	me
it’s	just	a	matter	of	course.”
	
“This	all	sounds	so	depressing.”
	
“Does	it?	The	only	thing	I	know	of	that	should	depress	anyone	is	being	ego-clad,
and	that’s	a	good	thing	to	be	depressed	about	because	then	you	can	awaken	to	your
situation	and	remedy	it,	as	you	yourself	are	doing.	Everyone	should	be	depressed	as

=== Page 104 ===
hell,	and	if	they	were,	then	something	might	actually	happen.	The	reason	we’re	not
committing	suicide	by	the	millions	is	because	we	live	in	constant	state	of	protective
denial	that	wraps	us	like	an	invisible	membrane,	the	price	of	which	is	a	life	lived	at
the	bare	minimum	level	of	consciousness.	The	necessities	of	life	are	food,	water,
shelter,	clothing,	denial	and	distraction.	Once	we	have	those,	we	can	turn	to	the
business	of	raising	the	next	generation	of	walking	dead.”
	
“You’re	just	a	little	ray	of	sunshine,	aren’t	you?”
	
“Do	you	disagree?”
	
She	releases	a	sigh.
	
“I	guess	not,	it	just	sounds	so—	yuck!”
	
“We’ve	only	scratched	the	surface	of	what	a	human	being	really	is.	To	me,	and	to
Bucke,	and	to	your	father,	I	think,	this	isn’t	depressing	at	all.	The	human	race	isn’t
defective,	it’s	just	broken.	That’s	good	news.	It	means	we	can	fix	ourselves.	We
don’t	have	to	be	like	this.	A	solution	can	be	found.	Something	interesting	could
actually	happen.	Anyway,	that’s	the	basic	premise	of	these	ideas	your	dad	and	I	like
to	play	with.”
	
“What	is	this	potential	we	have?”
	
“Infinite	Mind,	Inner	Access.	Every	man,	woman	and	child	a	Buddha.	Free	and
easy	access	for	everyone.”	I	look	at	her	over	the	tops	of	my	glasses.	“You’re	really
not	in	the	loop	on	all	this?”
	
“I’m	really	not.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Man	 is	 not	 plagued	 by	 countless	 thousands	 of	 insurmountable	 problems,	 as	 it
certainly	appears,	but	by	one	core	problem	from	which	all	others	radiate.	The	world
appears	dark	and	murky	and	unknowable,	so	we	falsely	assume	it	is	dark	and	murky
and	unknowable,	and	we	live	our	lives	based	on	that	unfounded	assumption.	Not
knowing	any	better,	we	muddle	along	as	best	we	can,	fumbling	blindly,	trying	to
interpret	 the	 shadows	 and	 make	 sense	 of	 the	 darkness.	 We	 have	 some	 of	 our
smartest	people	on	the	case—scientists,	sages,	priests,	scholars,	poets,	artists—all
striving	to	help	us	to	make	sense	of	the	world,	but	they	haven’t	come	up	with	much,

=== Page 105 ===
and	it’s	pretty	clear	they’re	not	going	to.	We	do	what	we’ve	been	doing	forever	and
it	results	in	the	world	we	have	at	present;	a	world	which	is	in	no	meaningful	way	an
improvement	over	the	world	as	it	has	ever	been,	because	man	himself	is	in	no
meaningful	way	improved.
	
But	here’s	the	good	part.
	
Man’s	potential	is	not	dark	and	murky	and	unknowable;	it	is	consciousness	and	it	is
infinite.	We	can	reclaim	the	infinite	dimension	from	which	we	are	presently	severed
by	ego,	by	fear.	We	can	gain	re-entry	into	that	from	which	we	have	been	cast	out;
garden,	paradise,	heaven	on	earth.	Any	and	everyone	can	do	this,	or	so	the	theory
goes.	It’s	not	reserved	for	the	elite	or	the	intelligent	or	the	devout	any	more	than
sunlight	is	reserved	for	the	wealthy	or	worthy.	It	doesn’t	take	years	or	decades	or
lifetimes.	It	is	proven,	documented,	irrefutable,	consistently	reproducible	science.	It
is	easy,	cheap,	and	here	right	now.	And	what	it	means	is	that	no	one,	no	matter	their
circumstances,	no	matter	how	high	or	low,	how	sick	or	well,	how	rich	or	poor,	is
ever	more	than	an	hour	away	from	the	more	popular	but	non-abiding	version	of
Spiritual	Enlightenment:
	
God-Consciousness.
	
So	now	we	consider	a	different	approach	to	the	problem.	Instead	of	fumbling	about
in	the	darkness	and	desperately	maintaining	the	self-deception	that	we’re	so	darned
happy	and	have	such	a	good	handle	on	things,	we	can	take	the	opposite	approach.
We	can	breed	and	cultivate	a	critical	discontent.	We	can	be	aggressively	pessimistic.
We	can	look	hard	and	see	clearly.	We	can	open	ourselves	to	the	amply-evidenced
possibility	that	the	bright	end	of	our	visible	spectrum	is	really	only	a	dusky	twilight,
that	we	truly	are	ignorant	brutes,	that	our	fairy-tale	belief	systems	are	beneath
contempt,	and	that	all	our	efforts	at	self-elevation	result	only	in	self-deception.
Once	armed	with	these	few,	obvious	truths,	we	can	at	long	last	lower	our	defenses
and	say	yes	to	fear	and	go	into	it.	We	can	acknowledge	the	fact	that	we	are	just
treading	water,	delaying	the	inevitable,	busying	ourselves	with	this	and	that	petty
distraction	 until	 we	 slip	 down	 into	 the	 darkness	 we’ve	 dedicated	 our	 lives	 to
denying.
	
When	we	trace	all	problems	back	to	their	single	source,	we	find	that	the	world
appears	dark	and	murky	and	unknowable	not	because	it	is,	but	because	the	lens
through	which	it	is	projected/perceived	is	filthy.	The	lens	is	self	and	the	filth	is	ego.
Clean	 the	 lens	 and	 the	 world	 resolves	 into	 crystal	 clarity,	 and	 darkness	 and

=== Page 106 ===
murkiness	are	forgotten	as	if	they	never	were.	(Eliminate	the	lens	altogether	and
you’re	enlightened,	but	then,	who	is	left	to	be	enlightened?)
	
That’s	why	any	true	and	complete	spiritual	teaching	can	be	fully	expressed	in	a	few
words;	wipe	the	lens,	think	for	yourself,	open	your	eyes,	know	thyself,	ask	Who	am
I?	All	the	world’s	spiritual	systems	are	dedicated	to	making	the	most	of	the	least,
but	why	make	the	most	of	darkness	when	we	can	just	turn	on	the	lights?
	
Because	we	are	not	adequately	discontent.	We	don’t	know	where	the	switch	is
because	we	haven’t	looked	for	it,	and	we	haven’t	looked	for	it	because	we	don’t
know	we’re	living	in	the	dark.
	
Frank	knows	that	mankind	dwells	in	a	state	of	perpetual	darkness,	which	is	nice,	but
the	reason	we’re	talking	about	him	here	is	because	he	also	knows	where	the	light
switch	is.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
The	Golden	Door
	
“Keep,	ancient	lands,	your	storied	pomp!”	cries	she
With	silent	lips.	“Give	me	your	tired,	your	poor,
Your	huddled	masses	yearning	to	breathe	free,
The	wretched	refuse	of	your	teeming	shore.
Send	these,	the	homeless,	tempest-tost	to	me,
I	lift	my	lamp	beside	the	golden	door!”
	
Emma	Lazarus,	The	New	Colossus
Inscribed	at	the	Statue	of	Liberty
	
	
Frank	was	heir
	to	the	vision	of	Dr.	Richard	M.	Bucke,	author	of	the	1901	book
Cosmic	Consciousness.	He	saw	what	Bucke	saw,	knew	what	Bucke	knew,	and,	like
Bucke,	he	had	the	intelligence,	imagination	and	courage	to	put	the	pieces	together
and	envision	a	future	in	which	we	were	all	granted	full	and	unrestricted	access	to
our	own	internal	dimensions.	On	the	one	hand	it	sounds	like	the	most	obvious,
desirable	and	natural	thing	in	the	world:	Freedom.	On	the	other	hand,	it	sounds
weirdly	insane	and	dangerously	radical:	Heresy.

=== Page 107 ===
	
Frank	told	me	that	he	had	always	planned	to	write	Cosmic	Consciousness	II,	but	he
had	the	opposite	problem	that	Bucke	had.	Where	it	was	probably	all	Bucke	could	do
to	cobble	together	a	handful	of	anecdotal	cases,	Frank	was	awash	in	a	sea	of	lucid
firsthand	accounts;	some	under	scientific	conditions,	some	not,	but	no	shortage	of
them	that	were	cogent	and	powerful	and	unassailable.	The	real	issue,	he	explained,
isn’t	the	one-time	event,	but	lasting	transformation;	the	permanent	upliftment	of	the
individual.	Those	cases,	he	said,	were	not	so	lavishly	scattered,	but	could	still	be
found.
	
He	didn’t	want	to	write	just	another	rehash	of	the	little	revolution	that	couldn’t.	He
wanted	to	carry	on	in	the	spirit	of	Bucke	and	approach	the	subject	with	an	almost
childlike	gladness,	with	a	Christmas	morning	excitement,	as	if	mankind’s	great
present	from	God	was	sitting	at	our	feet,	wrapped	in	shiny	paper	with	a	perfect	bow,
just	waiting	for	us	to	rip	it	open,	and	with	it,	ourselves.	That	was	his	dilemma;
childlike	gladness	was	ill-received	in	the	halls	of	academia.	Christmas	morning
excitement	doesn’t	pay	the	bills.	Frank	had	a	career	to	think	about	and	a	family	to
feed.
	
He	never	wrote	his	book,	so	he’ll	have	to	settle	for	a	few	inadequate	pages	in	mine.
I	can’t	make	his	argument	for	him,	but	the	great	frustration	of	his	life	was	that	he
couldn’t	either.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Frank	wasn’t	at	Harvard	or	Millbrook	with	Leary,	or	in	the	redwoods	or	on	the	bus
with	Kesey,	or	in	jail	with	either	of	them,	but	he	was	there	on	the	fringe	somewhere,
just	starting	out	in	his	academic	career,	full	of	big	ideas	and	a	little	revolutionary
zeal.	He	was	already	familiar	with	Bucke,	Whitman,	Thoreau,	Emerson,	and	that
bunch.	 He	 was	 already	 immersed	 in	 the	 mindset	 of	 an	 elevated	 humanity	 and
convinced	of	its	potential	for	upheaval.	He	understood	and	believed	in	what	Bucke
called	cosmic	consciousness,	but	the	problem,	as	he	saw	it,	was	one	of	access.	What
good	was	this	wonderful	faculty	everyone	supposedly	possessed	if	no	one	could
access	it?	What	good	is	a	door	if	you	can’t	open	it	and	go	through?
	
“It’s	not	about	the	door	or	the	wall	or	the	key,”	he	told	me	during	one	of	our
evening	chats,	“none	of	that.	Those	only	matter	on	this	side.	The	point	is	what’s	on
the	other	side.	The	point	is	going	there,	being	there.	Then	all	this	nonsense	of	doors
and	keys	is	forgotten.”
	

=== Page 108 ===
I	agreed	with	him	on	that	restating	of	the	gateless	gate	paradox.	The	person	who	is
free	has	no	feeling	of	freedom	any	more	than	a	person	who	is	not	on	fire	has	a
feeling	of	being	not	on	fire.	Freedom	is	a	concept	of	the	incarcerated	mentality.	It’s
something	you	think	about	when	you’re	looking	at	windowless	walls	and	locked
doors.	Once	you’re	through	and	beyond,	the	very	concepts	of	captivity	and	freedom
recede	out	of	existence	behind	you.
	
So	there	was	Frank	in	the	late	fifties	and	early	sixties,	staring	at	a	wall	he	knew	was
a	door,	but	a	door	he	didn’t	know	how	to	open.	Maybe	he’d	been	through	it	himself,
but	in	selfless	bodhisattva	style	he	wanted	to	throw	it	open	for	everyone.	“Why
shouldn’t	it	be	open?”	he	once	asked	me.	“What	the	hell’s	the	point	of	anything	else
if	we	don’t	have	this?”
	
Good	question.
	
And	then,	what	to	his	wondering	eyes	should	appear?	The	Golden	Key.	Very	much
a	miracle	and,	to	Frank’s	way	of	thinking,	far	more	important	than	the	discovery	of
fire	or	the	invention	of	the	wheel.	As	with	his	famous	Harvard	counterparts,	the	first
keys	he	found	out	about	were	brass	and	tin,	but	they	would	soon	be	displaced	by	the
true	Golden	Key:	Lysergic	acid	diethylamide.	LSD.
	
Instant	Buddhahood.	Free	and	easy	access	for	everyone.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
The	New	World.	That’s	what	Frank	called	this	dream	of	his.	He	thought	America
would	be	at	the	center	of	it,	that	this	was	the	true	freedom,	and	that	ushering	in	a
new	era	of	fully	realized	human	potential	was	America’s	promise	and	responsibility.
That,	to	him,	was	the	American	dream,	the	Emersonian	ideal;	not	a	car	in	every
garage	and	a	chicken	in	every	pot.	Frank’s	New	World	was	about	a	new	tomorrow,
not	 a	 continued	 downward	 spiral	 of	 greed,	 corruption,	 disease	 and	 stultifying
mediocrity.
	
In	the	same	way	that	having	a	clear	vision	of	humanity’s	potential	soured	him	on
the	 current	 state	 of	 humanity,	 having	 a	 clear	 vision	 of	 America’s	 potential
disappointed	him	with	regard	to	its	current	state.	I	think	this	might	be	one	of	the
reasons	he	and	Isabel	bought	their	Mexico	house	years	ago	and	vacationed	here	and
ultimately	 retired	 here.	 Frank	 was	 quietly	 disgusted	 with	 the	 United	 States	 of
America.
	

=== Page 109 ===
He	had	a	sad	sort	of	disillusioned	air	about	him.	From	our	semi-boozy	discussions	I
was	able	to	form	a	fairly	clear	picture	of	why.	Simply,	he	was	a	patriot.	He	loved
America,	 but	 the	 idea	 of	 America	 meant	 something	 to	 him	 that	 the	 reality	 of
America	didn’t	approach.	It	wasn’t	the	place	or	the	people	he	had	such	feelings	for,
but	the	idea.	He	wasn’t	a	nationalist,	he	was	a	humanist	and	an	idealist.	He	felt	that
America	had	a	destiny	it	had	failed	to	fulfill.	He	thought	we	were	supposed	to	be
venturing	into	new	frontiers,	not	walling	them	off	and	plastering	them	over.	He
once	likened	his	feelings	for	the	U.S.	to	a	son	for	whom	one	has	the	highest	hopes
and	expectations,	only	to	watch	him	grow	into	a	common	street	thug	and	drug
addict,	beyond	redemption,	all	potential	wasted,	all	hope	gone.	He	sadly	echoed
Lincoln’s	battlefield	dream	that	this	nation	shall	have	a	new	birth	of	freedom.	“But
what	started	out	of	the	people,	by	the	people	and	for	the	people,”	he	said,	“is	now	of
the	corporation,	by	the	corporation	and	for	the	corporation.”
	
When	I	knew	him,	he	still	possessed	a	youthful	dreaminess	that	most	of	us	leave
behind	with	our	teens;	an	obstinate	sort	of	optimism	he	had	never	outgrown.	It’s	a
good	thing	he	liked	to	drink	or	I	might	never	have	seen	it	in	him.	He	didn’t	get	loud
or	wobbly	or	maudlin	when	he	drank,	just	nostalgic	for	the	idealism	of	his	youth.
	
And	even	with	all	that,	he	was	not	particularly	sentimental.	He	didn’t	pine	for	his
stillborn	revolution,	he	merely	expressed	a	sadness	for	what	he	once	glimpsed
through	a	slightly	open	door;	his	dream	of	emancipation,	of	a	liberated	humanity.
Every	man,	woman	and	child	whole	and	complete.	He	approached	it	like	it	was	an
academic	issue	for	him,	but	there	was	a	lot	of	feeling	behind	his	words.	Words	like
his	don’t	get	expressed	without	a	lot	of	feeling	behind	them.	In	Bucke’s	case,	as	in
Frank’s,	the	words	were	fueled	by	the	direct	experience	of	a	reality	behind	this	one,
and	the	certain	knowledge	that	this	one	was	flat	and	hollow	by	comparison.	The
direct	experience	of	cosmic	consciousness	is	something	that	can	generate	a	lot	of
feeling.
	
The	rest	is	history.	The	dream	is	dead,	murdered	in	its	cradle.
	
“But	for	a	little	while	it	was	there,”	Frank	told	me	on	one	of	those	boozy	nights.
“We	could	open	that	door	for	everyone	forever,	or	so	it	seemed.	I	still	don’t	know
what	happened.	It	all	got	away	from	us	so	fast.	Well,	you	know	the	story,	you’ve
read	the	books.	Here	it	is	forty	years	later	and	look	at	this	ridiculous	world	we	have.
What	would	it	look	like	instead	if	that	door	had	been	kept	open?	What	would	we	be
like	after	several	generations?	What	would	that	look	like?	It	wouldn’t	look	like
Woodstock	or	Haight-Ashbury.	That	was	nothing.	That	was	just	the	first	few	crazy

=== Page 110 ===
minutes	of	a	history	that	was	never	written.	The	door	has	turned	back	into	a	wall
now.	Maybe	it’s	just	as	well.	Maybe	it’s	better	that	people	don’t	know.”
	
What	a	great	cause	to	be	on	the	losing	side	of.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“It	doesn’t	sound	like	my	father,”	Lisa	said	as	we	walked	the	shoreline.	“I	knew	he
liked	that	book,	Cosmic	Consciousness,	but	I	didn’t	know	he	had	all	these	crazy
ideas	about	evolution	or	anything.”
	
“It	seems	like	something	a	man	in	his	position	might	want	to	keep	private,”	I	say.
	
“From	his	own	family?”
	
I	don’t	respond.	She	knows	I’m	not	the	one	to	ask	personal	questions,	so	when	I
don’t	answer,	she	doesn’t	push.
	
“Do	you	agree	with	him?”	she	asks.
	
“About	what?”
	
“About	the	whole	thing.”
	
“I	don’t	see	anything	to	disagree	with.	I	mean,	it	has	the	air	of	a	nutty	conspiracy
theory,	but	I	don’t	see	any	specific	error	in	your	father’s	thinking.	LSD	is	certainly
everything	he	said	it	was;	the	facts	are	in	on	that	once	you	look	past	the	rabid
vilification	by	Maya’s	Ministry	of	Propaganda	and	Disinformation.	Anyone	capable
of	looking	can	see	that	for	themselves.	Mankind	is	certainly	functioning	at	a	very
marginal	level	of	consciousness,	so	the	only	direction	is	up.	Clearly,	there’s	an	on-
the-bus	or	off-the-bus	element—”
	
“So	you	did	agree	with	him.”
	
“As	an	exercise	in	dreamstate	theory	it	was	fun	and	it	benefited	the	book.	Beyond
that—”	I	leave	it	hanging.
	
“Beyond	that,	what?”
	

=== Page 111 ===
“Beyond	that,	nothing.	Except	as	it	serves	the	book,	I	have	very	little	interest	in	the
matter.	Your	father	understood	that.”
	
“Oh,	I	forget,”	she	says	sarcastically,	“it’s	all	just	a	dream.	Nothing	is	personal	to
you.	Nothing	really	matters.”
	
We	walk	in	silence	for	a	few	minutes.
	
“I’m	sorry	to	be	getting	testy,”	she	says.
	
“Say	what	you	want.	This	is	the	time.”
	
“Okay	then,	so	isn’t	that	right?	Nothing	matters	to	you.	Nothing	is	important	to	you.
Nothing	is	good	or	bad	or	better	or	worse?”
	
I	know	this	is	all	very	personal	for	her,	but	she’s	right;	nothing	is	personal	to	me.	If
I	had	to	choose	between	an	age	of	enlightenment	and	an	ice	age,	I’d	have	to	flip	a
coin.	It	would	be	like	going	to	a	theater	and	choosing	between	two	movies;	the
elevation	of	mankind	to	the	left	and	the	extermination	of	mankind	to	the	right.	Both
have	their	charms	and	both	would	make	for	an	amusing	diversion,	whether	in	reel
life	or	real	life,	but	if	confronted	with	such	a	choice,	I’d	probably	decide	not	to	see	a
movie	and	go	for	a	walk	instead.
	
We	stroll	in	silence	for	a	few	minutes	before	she	speaks.
	
“So,	it	was	a	failed	revolution,	the	way	my	father	saw	it?”
	
“In	effect.	He	joked	once	that	if	you	want	to	topple	a	superpower,	you	shouldn’t
send	peaceniks	and	flower	children	to	do	it.	He	wanted	the	door	opened,	that	was
the	 objective;	 free	 and	 easy	 access	 for	 everyone.	 It	 follows	 that	 the	 existing
paradigm	would	be	overturned,	but	that	wasn’t	his	main	focus.”
	
“I	keep	hearing	this	thing	about	free	and	easy	access,”	she	says.
	
“For	everyone,”	I	add.	“Free	and	easy	inner	access	for	everyone.	That’s	how	your
dad	phrased	it.”
	
“Okay,	 what’s	 that	 about,	 I	 mean,	 why	 phrase	 it	 that	 way?	 It	 seems	 like	 very
deliberate	wording,	almost	legalese.”
	

=== Page 112 ===
“Your	father	came	up	with	the	phrase	with	several	things	in	mind.	It’s	very	tricky	to
take	a	pro-drug	position	in	this	day	and	age,	especially	if	the	drug	is	as	effectively
demonized	as	acid,	though,	technically,	I	believe	it’s	an	agent,	not	a	drug.	Your
father	sought	to	head	off	the	inevitable	kneejerk	reactions	wherever	possible.”
	
“Acid,”	she	winces,	“Christ,	I	can’t	believe	we’re	even	talking	about	this.”
	
“That’s	the	kind	of	reaction	he	meant.	He	wasn’t	aware	of	any	problem	with	LSD.
He	thought	it	was	all	good.”
	
“Is	it?”
	
“I	haven’t	found	any	problem,	but,	as	I	told	your	dad,	I	wouldn’t	care	if	I	did.”
	
“Meaning	what?”
	
“Meaning—”	I	pause,	wanting	to	answer	deliberately	and	correctly,	here	on	the	hard
edge	of	things,	“that	if	I	were	the	guy	in	charge	of	making	this	dream	come	true,	I’d
accept	a	very	high	casualty	level.	Just	as	if	I	were	doing	it	for	my	own	liberation,
I’d	be	very	risk-tolerant.	Very.	It’s	all	just	hypothetical	though;	the	actual	downside
appears	to	be	negligible.”
	
“But	he	was	speaking	in	private	with	you.	Why	such	cautious	language?	It’s	not	like
him	to	be	so	guarded,	and	you	seem	sympathetic	to	his	views.”
	
“I	think	he’d	been	writing	a	book	in	his	head	for	decades.	You	might	even	find
notes	or	drafts	among	his	things.	His	ideas	were	pretty	well	developed.	He	used	that
particular	 phrasing	 to	 define	 a	 standard.	 He	 wasn’t	 talking	 about	 a	 hippie
renaissance	 or	 renewed	 government	 testing	 or	 more	 university	 studies,	 he	 was
talking	about	unrestricted	access	to	normally	unavailable	dimensions	of	selfhood,
and	the	criteria	he	settled	on	as	a	clear	standard	was	free	and	easy	access	for
everyone.	LSD	happens	to	meet	that	standard	and	nothing	else	does.”
	
“Really?	Nothing	else?”
	
“Your	dad’s	phrase	is	clever	in	that	it’s	very	exclusionary.	It	excludes	a	lot	of	other
drugs	 and	 agents	 and	 analogues.	 It	 also	 excludes	 other	 methods	 for	 achieving
expanded	states.	For	instance,	there	are	Zen	masters	and	meditation	experts	and
spiritual	gurus	who	claim	that	LSD	is	artificial	and	that	their	proprietary	methods
are	the	only	true	and	real	and	lasting	forms	of	inner	access,	something	like	that.”

=== Page 113 ===
	
“Is	that	a	valid	observation?	I	mean,	would	you	know?”
	
“I	wouldn’t	presume	to	speak	for	their	experiences,	but	I	would	say	that	they	had
their	chance	and	never	managed	anything	close	to	your	father’s	stated	ideal.	In	my
opinion,	free	and	easy	access	for	everyone	renders	all	religions	and	philosophies
and	spiritual	teachings	instantly	obsolete	and	irrelevant,	and	good	riddance.	It	puts
them	out	of	a	game	they	were	never	really	in.”
	
“And	LSD	really	does	that?”
	
“I	wasn’t	able	to	disprove	it.”
	
“And	religious	and	spiritual	groups	find	that	threatening?”
	
“Some,	naturally.	If	chemical	mysticism	means	you	can	drag	any	bum	in	off	the
street	 after	 breakfast	 and	 have	 him	 experiencing	 a	 full-blown	 state	 of	 God
consciousness	before	lunch,	then	the	rules	have	changed.	The	methods	of	access
they’re	defending	require	decades	of	devotion,	dedication	and	privation,	with	no
serious	likelihood	of	success.	Would	you	want	to	jump	into	a	rowboat	and	start
paddling	across	the	Atlantic	despite	terrible	hardship	and	struggle	and	the	near
certainty	of	failure,	or	jump	on	a	plane	and	be	in	Paris	tonight?	Anyway,	your	dad
sidestepped	the	entire	issue	by	defining	the	standard	as	free	and	easy	access	for
everyone.	When	you	put	it	that	way,	you	instantly	sweep	everyone	else	off	the	table.
It	doesn’t	leave	room	for	discussion	or	debate.”
	
“What	about	the	harmful	effects	you	hear	about?”
	
“Of	LSD?	Neither	of	us	were	aware	of	any	worth	mentioning.	Plenty	of	anecdotal
reports,	 scare	 tactics,	 problems	 with	 disturbed	 or	 unbalanced	 people,	 with
irresponsible	usage,	with	use	in	non-conducive	settings.	There’s	no	doubt	we’re
talking	about	a	very	powerful	substance,	capable	of	completely	revolutionizing
someone’s	 understanding	 of	 reality	 in	 a	 few	 hours.	 It’s	 probably	 prudent	 to
approach	it	with	some	respect.”
	
“Really?”
	
“Listen,	I’m	not	an	LSD	expert	or	advocate,	that’s	not	my	thing	at	all,	but	I’ll	say
this;	of	the	many	hours	I	spent	in	your	dad’s	library,	much	of	it	was	focused	on	the
anti-LSD	 material,	 and	 I	 was	 very	 unimpressed.	 I	 have	 a	 very	 good	 nose	 for

=== Page 114 ===
bullshit,	and	the	anti-LSD	material	reeked	of	it.	You’re	now	the	owner	of	that
library	so	you	can	look	into	it	for	yourself	if	you’re	interested,	but	I	don’t	think
you’ll	find	much	in	the	way	of	a	downside	to	responsible	LSD	use	except	bad
trips.”
	
“But	they	can	be	pretty	awful,	can’t	they?”
	
“I	guess	so,	but	that	seems	more	a	factor	of	your	own	internal	environment	and	not
the	agent	that	got	you	there.	Your	father	said	you	can’t	blame	the	key	if	you	don’t
like	what’s	on	the	other	side	of	the	door.
	
“Just	to	be	clear,	your	dad	wasn’t	talking	about	some	new	and	exciting	recreational
activity	we	could	add	to	our	current	list	of	diversionary	pastimes.	He	wasn’t	talking
about	escapism	in	the	way	that	drugs	are	used	in	the	West.	He	was	talking	about
reclaiming	our	natural	birthright,	our	sacred	heritage.	It’s	a	little	funny,	in	1984,	it
talks	about	a	society	of	peace,	brotherhood,	equality	that	could	have	been	created
but	wasn’t.	‘The	earthly	paradise	had	been	discredited	at	exactly	the	moment	when
it	became	realizable.’	That’s	what	your	dad	was	talking	about.	An	earthly	paradise
was	 his	 vision,	 and	 it	 was	 discredited	 exactly	 at	 the	 moment	 when	 it	 became
realizable.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
We	walk	in	silence.	I	think	about	these	two	versions	of	a	transformed	humanity	I’ve
looked	at	in	the	last	few	months:	Bob’s	view	that	people	can	make	this	transition	on
their	own	through	techniques	and	realization,	and	Frank’s	view	that	LSD	is	the	key
that	can	throw	the	door	open	for	everyone.	Bob’s	completely	unfounded	views	are
just	a	load	of	what	Brett	called	happy	horseshit,	meant	to	calm	spiritual	stirrings,
and	maybe	turn	a	buck	and	strike	a	pose	while	doing	it.	Frank	started	with	a	utopian
ideal	based	on	Bucke’s	book,	and	did	the	courageous	thing	by	following	the	facts
wherever	they	led.	Bob’s	idea	is	juvenile	nonsense	and	Frank’s	idea	is	at	least
plausible	in	theory,	but	what	they	have	in	common	is	that	neither	will	ever	come	to
pass.
	
And	it’s	not	really	desirable	that	they	should.	It’s	natural	that	we	should	want
something	better,	but	it	doesn’t	necessarily	follow	that	we	know	what	that	would	be,
or	that	we	should	have	it.	If	I	had	to	pick	a	winner	in	this	contest	of	views,	it
wouldn’t	be	Frank	or	Bob,	but	Lisa.	Joe	Banks,	not	Tim	Leary	or	the	Dalai	Lama.
One	person	making	a	break,	drawing	a	line,	that’s	where	the	best	thing	in	the	world
happens;	not	in	groups	or	in	societies,	but	in	individuals.

=== Page 115 ===
	
It’s	interesting	to	note	that	Bob’s	views	will	probably	be	well	received	and	that
Frank’s	balanced	and	heavily	documented	views	would	have	caused	him	to	be
scorned	out	of	his	career	and	ostracized	by	society.	Go	Maya.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
“Why	were	you	so	focused	on	the	negative	material?”	Lisa	asks.	“Weren’t	you
trying	to	write	about	the	golden	key	and	the	golden	door	and	everything?”
	
“No,	not	really.	That	was	more	your	dad’s	thing.	He	wanted	to	construct	some	sort
of	quasi-academic	document	that	would	turn	the	world	on	its	head.	I	didn’t	need	to
be	convinced,	and	I’m	really	not	that	interested.	What’s	interesting	to	me	is	how
quickly	and	effectively	that	door	got	slammed	shut.	That’s	Maya	at	work.	That’s
what	interests	me;	the	raw	power	and	cunning	of	fear.	I’m	not	writing	a	book	about
how	great	expanded	awareness	is;	there	are	plenty	of	those.	I	want	to	look	at	how
great	the	enemy	of	awakening	is.	It’s	interesting	to	observe	Maya	in	people,	in	ego,
but	it’s	been	a	real	education	to	isolate	and	observe	Maya’s	reaction	to	this	very
potent	threat	to	her	dominion.	Not	thousands	of	years	ago	in	a	foreign	land	when	no
one	wrote	anything	down	and	you	have	to	try	to	unravel	an	absurd	mythology,	but	a
few	years	ago,	right	here,	and	documented	from	every	angle	to	the	nth	degree.	It’s
been	like	this	specialized	branch	of	anthropology	that	focuses	on	understanding	the
ego	and	its	fascinating	talent	for	self-preservation.	Fun	for	me	and	good	for	the	third
book.	All	thanks	to	your	dad.”
	
“I’m	starting	to	think	he	really	was	a	bit	of	a	crackpot.”
	
“Maybe	he	was,	but	what	I	found	in	all	this	is	that	there	were	hundreds	of	so-called
visionaries	in	this	period,	the	sixties,	but	compared	to	your	dad	they	were	mostly
very	small-thinking	and	short-sighted.	I’m	sorry	your	father	never	got	to	write
Cosmic	Consciousness	II.	I	don’t	think	it	would	have	been	well-received	by	the
world,	but	that	would	be	a	reflection	on	the	world,	not	your	father	or	his	subject.”
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Lisa	and	I	have	talked	about	where	she’s	going	next,	where	her	life	will	be	taking
her,	who	she’s	going	to	be	from	now	on	and	what	it’s	going	to	be	like.	She	has	a
curiosity	about	her	future	that	ranges	from	anxious	to	excited.
	

=== Page 116 ===
She’s	feeling	homeless,	which	is	something	she’s	never	felt	before.	She	thinks	the
solution	is	to	find	a	home,	and	I’m	trying	to	help	her	see	that	the	solution	is	getting
comfortable	with	not	having	one,	or	with	being	at	home	everywhere.	She	wants	to
get	back	to	where	she	belongs,	and	isn’t	happy	to	hear	that	there	is	no	such	place.
	
Her	dad	and	I	talked	about	this	sort	of	transcending	into	homelessness	with	regard
to	LSD	and	kids	in	the	sixties.	How	ya	gonna	keep	‘em	down	on	the	farm	after
they’ve	seen	God?	After	they’ve	been	God?	Suddenly,	people	were	being	rocketed
out	of	their	mundane	realities	into	phantasmagorical	realms	of	hyper-awareness,
setting	themselves,	in	the	process,	adrift.
	
“Where	do	I	go	from	here?”	many	must	have	asked	themselves	in	quiet	moments.
“I’ve	destroyed	one	world,	so	now	what?	Obviously	I	don’t	go	back	to	school	to
become	an	accountant	or	an	engineer	or	a	lawyer	now	that	I	know,	beyond	any
possibility	of	doubt,	that	what	my	parents	call	life	is	just	cheap	shadowplay,	so
where	do	I	go?”
	
They	needed	some	understanding	of	this	new	level	of	reality	they	found	themselves
in,	some	framework	within	which	to	take	refuge	and	assimilate	their	transpersonal,
trans-human	trans-everything	experiences,	and	they	weren’t	finding	any	manuals	of
higher	consciousness	on	mom	and	dad’s	bookshelves.	They	were	catapulted	so	far
beyond	the	paradigm	of	their	parents	that	they	were	like	a	new	and	unprecedented
order	of	beings.	Leary’s	admonition	to	turn	on,	tune	in,	and	drop	out	was	fine	as	far
as	it	went,	which	was	exactly	nowhere.	Dropping	out	was	the	easy	part.	The	hard
part	is	that	when	you	drop	out	of	one	thing,	you	have	to	drop	into	another,	and	there
was	no	other	thing.	City	parks	and	crash-pads	and	Volkswagen	buses	do	not	make
for	an	inhabitable	paradigm.	A	new	social	strata	of	indigent	mystics	and	sidewalk
gurus	was	certain	to	not	long	endure.
	
“It’s	a	completely	unique	event	in	our	history,”	said	Frank.	“Where	else	can	you	see
anything	remotely	close	in	the	annals	of	human	consciousness?	The	genie	got	out	of
the	bottle	and	for	a	little	while	free	and	easy	access	for	everyone	was	a	reality.	Not
for	long,	but	it	was	there,	an	emerging	new	religion	with	an	authentic	sacrament
instead	of	a	symbolic	sacrament.	But	then	the	genie	got	crammed	back	into	the
bottle	and	the	bottle	was	labeled	poison	and	buried	so	deep	it	might	be	many
generations	before	it’s	seen	again.”
	
One	of	the	questions	Frank	and	I	played	with	was,	Where	are	they	now?	Now	we’re
looking	back	at	the	whole	thing	from	the	perspective	of	time,	where	did	they	all	go?
	

=== Page 117 ===
Back	to	the	farm,	we	concluded.	Where	else?	They	had	to	break	back	into	the
cuckoo’s	 nest,	 reintegrate	 themselves	 into	 the	 combine,	 reassimilate	 themselves
with	the	herd.	Like	Cypher,	the	traitor	in	The	Matrix,	they	had	to	weasel	their	ways
back	in	and	make	arrangements	for	their	memories.	Frank	talked	to	me	for	two
hours	one	night	about	memory	and	about	how	we	are	all	historical	revisionists	in
our	own	heads.	I	remember	that	at	the	time	it	sounded	like	the	mutability	of	the	past
Big	Brother	was	able	to	impose	on	the	citizens	of	Oceania.	Maybe	Maya	has	the
same	thing,	I	remember	thinking,	or	maybe	I	only	think	I	remember	thinking	it.
	
Not	all	of	the	godlings	underwent	repatriation.	Some	found	comfort	and	community
in	smaller	satellite	herds	loosely	united	under	the	catch-all	New	Age	banner,	but
that’s	just	a	petty	vanity;	all	sheep	in	herd	orbit,	no	matter	how	far	out,	are	still	part
of	the	herd.	Maya	is	the	good	shepherd,	and	few	if	any	head	were	lost.
	
“So	here	we	are,”	said	Frank,	“four	decades	later	looking	back	on	it,	and	what	do
we	see?	A	few	signs	of	impact	in	the	old	world,	a	few	secondary	revolutions—
feminist,	sexual,	racial—but	no	new	world	ever	sprang	up	out	of	it.	It	never	took
root.	It	never	had	a	chance.”
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
Visionary	Goofballs
	
Today	a	young	man	on	acid	realized	that	all	matter	is	merely	energy	condensed	to	a
slow	vibration,	that	we	are	all	one	consciousness	experiencing	itself	subjectively,
there	is	no	such	thing	as	death,	life	is	only	a	dream,	and	we	are	the	imagination	of
ourselves.	Here’s	Tom	with	the	weather.
	
Bill	Hicks
	
	
Bucke	and	Frank
	were	both	a	bit	goofy	in	their	own	ways.	Bucke	envisioned	a
future	of	socialism,	personal	aircraft,	the	end	of	cities,	and	eventually,	a	race	of
morally	 superior	 people	 possessed	 of	 the	 cosmic	 sense,	 which	 he	 expected	 to
develop	in	man	over	time,	like	color	perception,	becoming	a	race-wide	faculty	over
a	few	thousand	years.
	

=== Page 118 ===
Bucke	was	a	friend	and	admirer	of	Whitman,	but	never	went	further	than	that.	He
never	most	honored	Whitman’s	style:
	
He	most	honors	my	style	who	learns	under	it	to	destroy	the	teacher.
	
That’s	the	finger	pointing	at	the	moon	thing.	Bucke	couldn’t	honor	Whitman’s	style
that	way;	he	could	only	praise	and	admire	the	finger.	Whitman	was	saying	to	the
reader,	to	Bucke,	to	us,	this	is	your	journey:
	
Not	I	–	not	anyone	else,	can	travel	that	road	for	you,
You	must	travel	it	for	yourself.
	
Neither	Bucke	nor	Frank	ever	traveled	that	road.	They	both	stopped.	They	both	dug
in	and	became	self-appointed	spokesmen	for	a	journey	they	never	took,	making
optimistic	guesses	and	extrapolating	futures	they	would	never	see.	Were	either	of
them	right?	I	don’t	know.	Ask	me	again	in	a	few	thousand	years.	Although	neither
of	them	knew	it,	the	question	they	were	trying	to	answer	boils	down	to	this:	Can
fear	be	replaced	as	the	binding	agent	that	holds	the	dreamstate	together?	Is	there
another	core	emotion	of	sufficient	intensity	to	keep	this	whole	thing	lit	up?	And
both	 these	 men,	 in	 their	 different	 ways,	 and	 without	 really	 understanding	 the
question,	said	yes.
	
Me,	I	don’t	think	so.	I	know	Maya	pretty	well	and	I	don’t	see	her	ever	losing	more
than	the	occasional	stray.	A	species-wide	transformation	is	a	pretty	idea,	but	we
have	little	cause	for	optimism	and	plenty	for	pessimism.	It’s	nice	to	think	we	could
elevate	ourselves,	and	it’s	fun	to	dabble	in	theoretical	scenarios,	but	the	reality	is
that	man	will	never	evolve	or	transcend	or	develop	beyond	his	past	and	present
level.
	
If	that	sounds	like	a	bad	thing	to	us,	if	Maya	sounds	like	a	force	of	evil,	if	the	terms
by	which	man	lives	on	this	planet	seem	too	oppressive	or	restrictive,	then	we	might
do	well	to	take	a	step	back	and	reevaluate	the	situation.	Where	are	we?	What	is	this
place?	Is	it	a	prison	to	be	despised	or	an	amusement	park	to	be	explored	and
enjoyed?	Is	ego	a	hideous	affliction?	Or	is	it	simply	the	vehicle	that	allows	us	to
come	out	and	play?	When	the	choice	is	between	no-self	and	false-self,	false-self
starts	looking	pretty	good,	and	despising	and	demonizing	it	starts	to	seem	pretty
ungrateful.
	
Maybe	there	are	other	planes	of	existence	and	maybe	the	inhabitants	of	those	higher
planes	 are	 of	 a	 more	 evolved,	 less	 benighted	 nature.	 Maybe	 this	 whole

=== Page 119 ===
physical/human	plane	is	just	the	coarsest	level	of	self-awareness,	a	kindergarten	in
that	larger,	subtler	dreamscape,	but	that’s	not	what	Frank	or	Bucke	were	talking
about	and,	beyond	the	obvious	mechanism-of-denial	reasons,	I	don’t	know	why
anyone	would	care	about	the	extended	forecast	anyway.	Life	isn’t	down	the	road	in
the	distant	mists	of	time.	The	game	is	afoot,	here,	now,	on	the	physical/human
plane.	Most	people	get	through	the	day	by	believing	that	if	they	don’t	break	too
many	rules	too	much,	they	automatically	get	promoted	up	through	the	ranks;	be	it
one	life	and	straight	to	the	top	or	a	climb	of	many	smaller	steps.	This	comes	to	us
from	Maya’s	Ministry	of	Deferral	&	Procrastination,	which	promotes	a	doctrine	of
plausible	 denial	 and	 applied	 non-aggression,	 and	 where	 the	 motto	 is	 Rock	 the
Cradle,	Not	the	Boat.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Lily	Tomlin	said	the	problem	with	being	in	the	rat	race	is	that	even	if	you	win,
you’re	still	a	rat.	To	my	way	of	thinking,	the	problem	with	being	in	the	human	race
is	that	even	if	you	win,	you’re	still	a	human.	Let’s	pretend	for	a	moment	that	we’re
not,	as	a	race,	a	mere	tweak	or	two	from	perfection,	but	a	cataclysmic	makeover
away.	Let’s	say,	for	the	sake	of	argument,	that	the	way	humanity	is	now	is	nowhere
close	to	what	it	could	be,	that	we’re	nowhere	in	the	vicinity	of	what	we	might
become,	that	we’re	morbidly	mired	at	the	shitty	end	of	the	potential	spectrum.	It
certainly	seems	that	the	light	of	human	consciousness	is	at	its	lowest	possible
setting	and	cannot	be	further	dimmed,	so	at	least	there’s	cause	for	optimism:	it	can’t
get	any	worse.	Maybe	it	just	has	to	get	a	little	brighter,	just	a	smidge,	and	then	some
positive	tipping	point	is	reached	and	the	whole	thing	lights	up	like	day	and	these
dark	ages	are	only	remembered	for	their	slow-dissolving	steel	and	concrete.	Man
can	crawl	out	of	the	lightless	tarpits	of	religion	and	spirituality	the	way	our	distant
ancestors	crawled	out	of	the	oceans	and	some	version	of	Frank’s	crazy-ass	New
World	could	evolve,	populated	by	integrated,	empathetic/sympathetic,	awake/aware,
whole-brained,	fully	conscious,	open-eyed,	non-fear-based	humans.	I	doubt	it,	but	if
it	ever	happens,	it	will	only	happen	by	getting	people	through	that	door	that	Frank
saw,	and	there’s	no	doubt	that,	in	all	of	known	creation,	the	only	thing	that	might	be
called	the	Golden	Key,	that	might	offer	free	and	easy	access	for	everyone,	is	LSD.
	
That	is	one	of	the	two	important	lessons	we	can	take	from	this	psychedelic	episode
in	our	history,	the	sixties.	We	are,	without	a	doubt,	at	the	shitty	end	of	the	potential
spectrum.	Every	Tom,	Dick	and	Mary	got	to	travel	the	rest	of	the	spectrum	and	they
took	good	notes	and	that	is	what	we	learned.	You	don’t	have	to	be	“on	the	bus”	to
understand	 this,	 you	 only	 have	 to	 visit	 any	 reasonably	 well-stocked	 library	 or
bookstore	 and	 take	 an	 hour	 to	 see	 it	 for	 yourself;	 there	 are	 higher	 ranges	 of

=== Page 120 ===
consciousness	open	to	us,	and	from	there,	the	narrow	range	in	which	we	live	and	die
barely	registers	as	consciousness	at	all.
	
My	assistants	and	proofreaders	warn	me	that	people	don’t	like	to	hear	themselves
portrayed	so	negatively.	That	surprises	me.	I	would	think	that	most	folks,	if	they
took	a	minute	to	sit	down	and	really	think	about	it,	would	blubber	in	joyous	relief	to
find	out	that	what	they’d	been	calling	life	was	really	just	the	most	meager	level	of
subsistence	and	that	there	were	infinitudes	more	to	this	whole	thing	then	they’d
been	led	to	believe.
	
Just	to	give	you	the	merest	idea,	think	of	all	the	time	and	effort	and	energy	you	put
into	projecting	yourself	into	the	world,	into	playing	your	role,	into	being	you.	Then,
once	 you	 have	 some	 appreciation	 for	 what’s	 involved,	 imagine	 not	 doing	 it
anymore.	 Imagine	 if	 you	 could	 stop	 being	 you	 and	 just	 be.	 That’s	 kind	 of	 a
sideways	way	of	saying	something	really	central	to	this	whole	subject.	How	would
your	life	be	different	if	you	didn’t	have	to	keep	conjuring	yourself	into	existence
every	moment	and	just	existed?	And,	on	the	other	side	of	this	coin,	there’s	your
obligation	to	reflect	others	back	to	them	as	they	reflect	you	back	to	you.	What	if
you	broke	this	social	compact	of	mutual	ego-assurance?	What	if	you	could	just	drop
these	 two	 all-consuming	 activities?	 What	 if	 you	 withdrew	 all	 energy	 from	 the
fictional	character	you	play?	And	now,	what	if	everyone	did	it?
	
What	then?
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
The	point	Frank	sought	to	impress	upon	me	again	and	again,	the	point	that	he
seemed	to	find	most	incomprehensible,	most	galling,	was	that	those	higher	ranges
of	consciousness	being	denied	to	us	are	the	very	essence	of	who	and	what	we	are.
They	are	our	infinite	and	unbounded	selves,	and	they	are	closed	off	to	us	at	the	very
moment	in	history	when	they	first	became	open	to	us.
	
“That’s	all	any	of	this	is	about,”	he’d	often	repeat.	“Every	culture	in	history	has	had
their	method	of	accessing	the	great	within,	but	it	was	always	restricted	to	the	few,
the	elite,	renunciates,	shamans	and	the	like,	but	now,	for	the	first	time	ever,	we	have
it	in	our	power	to	make	it	freely	and	easily	available	to	everyone—everyone.	The
most	important	event	in	the	history	of	man	and	what	happens?	The	whole	world
rises	up	against	it.”
	

=== Page 121 ===
Leaving	us	with	the	crop	of	methods	we	currently	have,	methods	that	Maya	doesn’t
bother	 clamping	 down	 on	 because	 they	 pose	 no	 threat;	 that	 are,	 in	 fact,	 so
ineffectual	for	their	stated	usage	and	so	perfectly	suited	to	the	perpetuation	of
delusion,	that	we	can	know	without	doubt	from	whose	lineage	they	come	down	to
us.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Which	brings	us	to	the	more	important	lesson	the	sixties	have	to	offer:	Maya.	As
impressive	as	we	see	she	is	when	we	bother	to	look,	we	are	only	seeing	her	at	her
most	 relaxed	 state.	 Facing	 no	 serious	 threat,	 she	 operates	 at	 only	 a	 minimal
readiness	level.	She	is	like	a	sleeping	giant	who	can	do	her	job	without	being	any
more	alert	than	those	over	whom	she	watches.	But	when	an	escape	attempt	is
launched	that	has	the	potential	to	set	the	captives	free	in	any	serious	numbers,	an
event	we’ve	only	seen	once,	then	the	attentive	observer	is	rewarded	with	a	glimpse
of	what	Maya	is	really	capable;	a	very	impressive	sight.	Bringing	perhaps	only	a
fraction	of	her	offensive	might	to	bear,	she	slammed	the	door	shut,	sealed	it	tight,
plastered	it	out	of	visible	existence,	and	labeled	the	area	radioactively	contaminated
so	the	herd	steers	well	clear,	effectively	turning	humanity	rabidly	against	the	only
thing	that	might,	with	a	straight	face,	be	called	a	practicable	road	to	salvation.	LSD
provided	the	one	and	only	serious	offensive	assault	against	Maya	and	without	much
fuss	or	bother	she	rose	to	the	challenge	and	quelled	the	uprising,	swatting	it	like	a
bug	 and	 settling	 back	 into	 her	 light	 doze.	 She	 villanized,	 demonized,	 and
criminalized	the	entheogenic	class	of	substances	so	effectively	that	here	we	are	now,
a	few	decades	later,	and	all	that	can	really	be	said	of	mankind’s	one	chance	for
liberation	is	that	a	hole	in	the	wall	was	brought	to	the	attention	of	the	warden,	and
promptly	repaired.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
A	young	country	with	boundless	idealism,	poetic	vision,	and	virtually	limitless
wealth,	 burning	 with	 words	 like	 freedom	 and	 expansion	 and	 exploration,	 with
phrases	 like	 all	 men	 are	 created	 equal,	 and	 inalienable	 rights,	 and	 pursuit	 of
happiness;	that’s	a	place,	said	Frank,	where	good	things	could	happen.
	
“What	is	a	Declaration	of	Independence	itself	except	an	act	of	rebellion?”	he	asked.
“It’s	a	revolutionary	decree;	a	response	to	what	it	calls	an	absolute	tyranny.	It’s	a
declaration	of	war.	Where’s	that	spirit	today?	It	doesn’t	exist.	I’m	proof	of	that.	If	I
never	stood	up	and	said	something,	who	will?	We	are	a	vanquished,	broken	people.
We	are	slaves.”

=== Page 122 ===
	
That’s	how	he	talked	sometimes.
	
“Whenever	 any	 form	 of	 government	 becomes	 destructive	 of	 these	 ends,”	 he
continued,	lifting	his	glass,	“it	is	the	right	of	the	people	to	alter	or	to	abolish	it,	and
to	institute	new	government.”
	
“Declaration	of	Independence?”	I	asked.
	
He	nodded	solemnly	with	a	muffled	belch.
	
Revolution	is	the	overthrow	of	a	tyrannical	oppressor.	Whether	individually	or
collectively,	it	is	the	ultimate	expression	of	discontent.	Revolutions	start	small	and
rely	perforce	on	guerrilla	tactics.	They	begin	with	treasonous	plotters	meeting	in
barns	 and	 back	 rooms.	 The	 enemy	 faced	 by	 these	 uppity	 peasants	 consists	 of
established	governments,	standing	armies,	courts,	established	order,	fearful	family,
the	press,	and	an	intelligence	apparatus	capable	of	rooting	out	insurgency	before	it
moves	beyond	the	pitchfork	and	birdgun	stage.
	
Of	course,	when	it’s	just	a	conflict	between	oppressed	citizens	and	their	oppressive
governments,	or	between	inmates	and	prison	staff,	that’s	merely	the	dreamstate
shadow	of	the	real	process	of	revolution;	the	personal	declaration	of	independence,
the	individual	bid	for	freedom,	the	one	true	war	of	which	all	others	are	but	shadows.
	
If	you	were	the	tyrannical	oppressor,	it	would	be	your	job	to	avoid	an	uprising	and
maintain	order.	That’s	not	really	very	difficult	because	we,	the	people,	actually	want
to	be	oppressed.	We	just	don’t	want	it	too	get	so	uncomfortable	that	we’d	prefer
death	to	continued	oppression.	The	art	and	science	of	tyrannical	oppression	is	to
bind	 the	 spirit,	 but	 not	 so	 much	 that	 death	 becomes	 preferable	 to	 continued
bondage.	 As	 America’s	 founding	 fathers	 knew,	 it’s	 easy	 to	 keep	 people	 from
choosing	death:
	
“…
all	Experience	hath	shewn,	that	Mankind	are	more	disposed	to	suffer,	while
Evils	are	sufferable,	than	to	right	themselves	by	abolishing	the	Forms	to	which	they
are	accustomed.”
	
U.S.	Declaration	of	Independence
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	

=== Page 123 ===
In	Frank’s	entheogenic	revolution,	however,	it’s	not	so	much	a	matter	of	the	current
regime	being	insufferably	oppressive	as	it	is	of	the	new	regime	being	so	mind-
bogglingly	superior	that	present	conditions	seem	like	life	in	a	coffin	by	comparison.
That’s	why	the	little	revolution	of	the	sixties	sputtered	and	died;	not	because	Maya
is	invincible,	but	because	desire	is	a	very	weak	agent	of	change.	And	if	we	can
understand	why	that	doomed	it	from	the	start,	we	can	also	understand	why	any
attempt	to	launch	a	personal	revolution	pulled	by	desire	rather	than	pushed	by
insufferable	discontent	is	similarly	doomed,	and	why	Frank’s	revolution	failed	and
Lisa’s	succeeded.
	
Personal	 revolution	 is	 fueled	 by	 emotional	 energy	 of	 the	 purest	 intensity.	 That
intensity	comes	from	focus	and	that	kind	of	focused	emotional	energy	doesn’t	look
like	 love	 or	 tranquility	 or	 compassion.	 It	 looks	 like	 seething	 rage	 or	 severe
psychosis.	It’s	an	ugly	fact	of	an	ugly	business,	but	that’s	how	it	works.	Suicidal
discontent;	that’s	how	revolutions	are	won	and	that’s	why	they	so	seldom	are.
Rockets	aren’t	launched	into	space	on	chanting	and	prayers,	and	escaping	the	ego’s
gravity	requires	an	equivalent	amount	of	explosive	force.	We	have	to	take	all	the
emotional	 energy	 we	 normally	 blast	 out	 in	 a	 thousand	 directions	 to	 keep	 our
dreamstate	characters	animated	and	focus	it	on	a	single	point.	It’s	all	or	nothing.
	
This	is	the	kind	of	stuff	Frank	and	I	discussed	now	and	then.	He’d	spent	his	life
quietly	wondering	where	his	beloved	revolution	went	wrong,	how	the	LSD-based
transcendence	of	the	species	he’d	watched	unfolding	ended	up	failing	so	miserably.
I	know	he	came	to	understand	the	whole	thing	better	by	discussing	it	with	me,	but	I
don’t	think	that	made	him	any	happier	about	it.	The	way	he	saw	it,	the	war	was
over,	the	good	guys	lost,	and	history	is	written	by	the	winners.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
Standard	religions	and	belief	systems,	whether	orthodox	or	unorthodox,	mainstream
or	whacko,	serve	to	keep	the	herd	together	and	heading	slowly	nowhere	in	an
orderly	manner.	Whether	we	believe	in	something	or	believe	we	don’t	believe	in
anything	makes	no	difference.	All	beliefs	are	the	same	belief.	There	is	only	the
herd.
	
There	are	always	those	who	aren’t	content	within	the	herd	and	seek	something	more
than	mindless	plodding	and	grazing	and	humping.	They	peel	themselves	away	and
form	subherds	that	travel	apart	but	alongside,	independent	in	belief	and	appearance
only.	There	are	also	the	occasional	stragglers	and	strays,	but	the	trick	to	keeping
loose	stock	with	the	herd,	the	good	shepherd	knows,	is	to	let	them	stray.	They	won’t

=== Page 124 ===
go	far.	Where	would	they	go?	What	is	commonly	thought	of	as	the	herd	is	really
just	the	core	herd.	There	is	a	larger,	more	scattered	herd	that	becomes	visible	as	our
elevation	increases	and	our	perspective	broadens.	Those	at	the	outermost	fringes,	to
the	sides	or	far	out	front,	are	no	less	a	part	of	the	herd	than	those	at	the	heart,
they’re	just	indulging	in	a	bit	of	egoic	self-gratification.	Draw	back	far	enough	and
we	see	that	everyone	is	plodding	in	the	same	aimless	direction	at	the	same	shuffling
pace,	and	that	the	very	idea	of	a	radical	or	a	revolutionary	or	a	bold	explorer	is
nothing	more	than	a	petty	conceit.	There	are	no	explorers,	there	is	no	spirit	of
exploration,	there	is	no	courage,	there	is	no	freedom	or	love	of	freedom.
	
There	is	only	the	herd.
	
Every	once	in	a	while	a	single	beast	does	leave	the	herd.	Never	a	group	or	even	a
pair.	Where	there’s	more	than	one,	there’s	the	herd.	They	only	go,	when	they	go,
one	at	a	time.	And	where	do	they	go?	Over	the	edge,	of	course.	Where	else?	There
are	only	two	choices;	the	herd	and	over	the	edge.
	
There	is	only	the	herd.
	
And	there	is	no	herd.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
I’ve	said	that	when	I	was	young,	I	never	found	anyone	I	would	have	wanted	to	be
like.	Not	only	didn’t	I	know	anyone,	I	didn’t	know	of	anyone.	There	was	no	success
that	looked	like	success	to	me,	there	was	no	accomplishment	that	seemed	worth	the
bother.	The	only	thing	I	ever	remember	thinking	might	be	a	good	way	to	spend	a
life	 was	 as	 a	 failed	 poet;	 kind	 of	 like	 the	 village	 idiot	 but	 without	 the	 civic
responsibilities.	The	idea	of	being	a	successful	poet	held	no	charm,	but	being	a
failure	as	a	poet	had	a	nice	feel	to	it.	A	one-man	revolution;	certain	to	fail,	but	for	a
good	cause.	Anyway,	as	I	think	about	it	now,	I	think	I	like	what	Frank	and	Bucke
did—or	almost	did,	or	tried	to	do,	or	thought	about	doing—with	their	lives	and	their
wise,	foolish,	impossible	dreams.	They	were	failed	poets	in	the	way	that	I	mean	it,
and	if	my	life	had	gone	another	way	I	think	I	would	have	been	content	to	be	like
them.
	
	
*	*	*
	
	

=== Page 125 ===
Nothing	Forever:	A	Post-Apocalyptic	Lightmare
	
Three	minutes	thought	would	suffice
to	find	this	out;
but	thought	is	irksome
and	three	minutes	is	a	long	time.
	
AE	Houseman
	
	
Although	my	primary	epiphany
	could	be	summed	up	as	Truth	Exists,	it	was
actually	much	more	complicated	than	that.	The	flipside	of	Truth	Exists	is	This	Ain’t
It.
	
That	primary	epiphany	detonated	in	my	mind	like	a	smart	bomb	and	left	me	all
alone	on	a	desert	planet	that	had	only	that	morning	been	teeming	with	people	and
problems	and	emotions	and	history	and	drama	and	a	million	other	things	that	were
instantly	reduced	to	fine	ash	by	the	spiritual	apocalypse	that	incinerated	my	world
in	a	brilliant	flash	of	light.
	
After	the	blast,	I	found	myself	stumbling	dazed	and	shell-shocked	though	a	post-
apocalyptic	landscape	undreamed	of	by	science	fiction	writers.	Civilizations	were
reduced	to	windless	deserts.	Cities	I	now	saw	as	blackened	craters	and	people	as
shadows	of	smoke.	What	had	been	Earth,	Home,	Humanity,	Family,	Life,	could
now	be	most	aptly	called	Nothing	Forever.
	
How	did	I	get	here?	Here	where?	Here	what?	It	can’t	be	what	it	appears	to	be,
(though	I	know	it	is).	It	can’t	really	be	Nothing	Forever,	(though	I	know	it	can’t	not
be).	There	must	be	something	somewhere,	(though	I	know	there’s	not).	I	have	to
see.	I	have	to	look	for	myself.
	
Where	are	the	people?	The	cities?	Where	are	the	churches?	Where	are	the	statues
and	icons?	Where	are	the	great	philosophies	and	belief	systems?	Surely	they	must
have	survived.	Who	am	I	to	be	here	alone?	Where	are	all	the	smart	ones?	The	ones
who	seemed	so	serious,	so	stable	and	deeply-rooted	and	tightly	wrapped?	So	real?
Where	are	the	ones	with	the	strong	beliefs	and	complex	philosophies?	Why	aren’t
they	here?	Where	are	the	heroes?	This	is	a	place	where	there	should	be	heroic	men
and	women.	The	best	of	the	best	should	be	here,	the	smartest,	the	bravest,	the	most
devout,	the	truest.	Where	are	they?	Where	are	the	signs	that	they’ve	been	here?	It

=== Page 126 ===
can’t	just	be	me.	There	must	be	others.	I	couldn’t	believe	I	was	all	alone	on	this
desolate	planet,	so	I	went	off	to	have	a	look	around.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
I	went	to	philosophy.	What	had	been	entire	libraries	of	man’s	collected	wisdom,
including	all	that	ancient	Greek	stuff	and	all	those	Europeans	from	the	last	few
centuries	with	their	humongous	brains	and	their	gigantic	thoughts.	Where	was	all
that	now?	Gone	as	if	it	never	was.	Washed	away	like	sandcastles	on	the	beach.	All
that	was	left	where	I	expected	to	find	Great	Minds	and	Great	Thoughts	was	a
blueprint	for	a	bomb	like	the	one	that	had	done	this	to	my	world:	Cogito	Ergo	Sum.
	
So,	I	wondered,	where	was	René	Descartes?	I	should	be	able	to	find	more	of	him
than	those	three	words.	But	no.	I	discovered	that	even	the	guy	who	created	such	a
bomb	didn’t	know	what	it	really	was	or	what	it	could	really	do;	he	built	the	bomb
but	he	never	set	it	off	in	his	own	life.
	
I	went	to	religion.	Any	religion,	denomination,	cult	or	sect	would	do;	anything	that
was	still	standing	in	this	flattened	world	would	be	a	welcome	and	amazing	sight,
but	nothing	was.	All	the	books	and	statues	and	fancy	clothes	and	beautiful	buildings
were	vaporized.	Nowhere	was	one	stone	left	on	top	of	another.	I	was	stunned,	but
not	surprised.
	
I	went	to	the	occult	and	the	New	Age,	to	spirituality	and	Eastern	thought.	By	this
time	my	eyes	had	become	well-adjusted	to	the	bright	light	of	this	new	world	and	I
could	fully	absorb	in	a	moment	what	it	might	once	have	taken	years	to	see.	There
were	others	like	me,	I	saw,	but	few.	They	were	easier	to	make	out	now	that	all	the
pretenders	had	been	vaporized.	Still,	I	wasn’t	there	to	learn	or	to	acquire	or	to
master	anything.	I	had	no	desire	to	become	a	student.	This	wasn’t	a	scholarly	or
theological	pursuit.	I	had	no	need	for	a	vehicle.	I	wasn’t	curious	about	teachings	and
philosophies	 and	 beliefs	 beyond	 the	 initial	 assessment	 of	 whether	 or	 not	 they
survived	the	blast.	I	was	just	looking	to	see	if	there	was	anything	still	standing,	and
there	wasn’t	much.	Not	nothing,	but	not	much.
	
As	 long	 as	 I	 was	 in	 the	 neighborhood	 I	 looked	 in	 on	 Buddhism,	 but	 all	 that
remained	 was	 the	 diamond	 of	 Zen	 under	 an	 ash	 mountain	 of	 faux-Zen.	 I	 was
interested	to	finally	see	it	in	clarity,	but	real	Zen	is	just	another	name	for	the	bomb,
and	there	was	nothing	left	to	blow	up.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

=== Page 127 ===
	
All	that	scorched-earth	wandering	wasn’t	the	end,	it	was	just	the	beginning.	I	still
had	my	own	personal	deconstruction	to	do,	which	is	how	I	spent	almost	the	next
two	years,	until	I	got	to	a	place	called	Done.
	
The	external	searching	is	only	one	part	of	the	story.	The	other	part	is	the	internal
part;	 the	 slow,	 painful	 sloughing	 away	 of	 self,	 layer	 by	 layer,	 piece	 by	 piece.
Spiritual	self-debridement.	Some	layers	of	selfhood	just	fall	away,	some	tear	off	in
long	strips	or	flabby	hunks,	and	some	have	to	be	meticulously,	pain-stakingly;
surgically	 removed.	 Everything	 I	 had	 become	 in	 decades	 of	 life	 I	 now	 had	 to
unbecome.	All	I	really	was	was	belief,	so	everything	I	believed	I	now	had	to
unbelieve.	My	new	world	was	cold	and	bright	and	honest,	but	my	old	mind	was	still
full	of	a	lifetime’s	accumulation	of	belief	and	opinion	and	false	knowledge	and
emotional	attachment—all	the	noxious	debris	and	toxic	waste	that	make	up	the	ego
—and	it	all	had	to	go.	That’s	a	process	and	it	takes	time.	The	world	might	be
annihilated	in	a	flash,	but	self	takes	a	little	longer	to	burn	away.	There’s	no	bomb
for	that.	There’s	no	pretty	Latin	phrase	or	Sanskrit	mantra	that	annihilates	self
quickly	or	painlessly.	There’s	no	realization	or	insight	or	epiphany	that	wipes	away
the	false	self	in	a	flash.	Those	who	claim	to	have	awakened	in	a	flash	are	the	most
deluded	of	all.
	
Then	it	was	time	for	the	mountain	to	be	a	mountain	again.	I	spent	the	next	ten	years
trying	to	make	sense	of	this	new	world;	a	non-world	in	which	a	non-I	nevertheless
seemed	to	reside.	The	waking	dreamstate.	It	was	like	the	world	had	turned	from
hard	solidity	into	shimmering	mirage.	I	could	still	see	the	world	I	had	always
known,	but	I	could	not	find	its	substance.	Whatever	I	reached	out	to	touch,	my	hand
passed	through.	Whatever	I	thought	about	dissolved	in	my	mind.	Whoever	I	looked
at,	I	saw	through	like	vapor,	myself	included.	I	looked	at	my	own	character,	and	it
was	like	a	face	you	see	in	a	cloud	for	a	second	before	it’s	gone.
	
~~~~~~~~~~~~~
	
My	reality	now	is	the	awakened,	untruth-unrealized	state,	and	it’s	the	same	for	me
as	for	anyone	who	comes	to	it.	There	are	no	masters	or	novices	here.	There	are	no
teachings	or	beliefs;	no	Hindus	or	Buddhists	or	Jnanis	or	Advaitins;	no	masters	or
yogis	or	swamis;	no	discorporate	entities	or	higher	level	energies	or	superior	beings.
Awake	is	awake.	Everything	else	is	everything	else.
	
With	all	this	in	mind,	it	should	be	easy	to	understand	why	there	would	be	very	little
latitude	in	my	thinking	as	to	the	definition	of	Spiritual	Enlightenment.	Within	the

=== Page 128 ===
dreamstate	there	are	countless	shades	of	gray,	but	between	the	dreamstate	and	the
awakened	state	there	are	no	shades	at	all.	The	distinction	is	absolute:	Truth	exists.
Untruth	does	not.
	
This	is	enlightenment	theory—the	pure,	binary	mathematics	of	truth—and	it’s	very
simple;	as	easy	as	one,	two,	three,	but	without	the	two	and	the	three.	It’s	so	simple
and	obvious	that	you’d	have	to	close	your	eyes	and	bury	your	head	not	to	see	it.
	
Specifically,	you	would	need	some	mechanism	by	which	to	generate	an	energy	field
around	 yourself,	 an	 artificial	 micro-environment,	 a	 one-man	 spacecraft	 with	 an
interactive	 in-flight	 movie	 so	 engrossing	 that	 you	 could	 forget	 that	 you	 were
floating	alone	in	empty	space	and	believe	that	you	were	in	a	world	full	of	people
and	drama	and	meaning.
	
Which	is	exactly	the	case.
	
The	mechanism	by	which	you	accomplish	this	most	remarkable	of	all	feats	is	a
well-oiled	combination	of	emotion	and	intelligence.	Emotion	powers	the	energy
field,	Maya	is	the	ruling	intelligence,	the	in-flight	movie	is	called	Delusion.	and	this
ship	in	which	you	aimlessly	float	through	Nothing	Forever	is	called	Ego.
	
And	 when	 that	 soap	 bubble	 pops?	 When	 ego	 is	 destroyed?	 When	 Maya	 is
vanquished?	What	then?
	
Everything.
	
Who	then?
	
No	one.
	
It	should	now	be	easy	to	understand	that	a	true	and	complete	spiritual	teaching	can
be	conveyed	in	three	words,	while	those	that	require	entire	libraries	of	books	and
legions	of	graybearded	scholars	to	decrypt	them	can	succeed	only	in	producing	ever
more	darkness	and	confusion.	It	should	now	be	clear	that	there	are	no	cases	of
instant	enlightenment,	that	awakening	is	not	the	result	of	a	single	epiphany,	but	of	a
long,	arduous	journey	wherein	every	step	is	a	long,	arduous	journey.	It	should	now
be	obvious	that	all	dogma,	beliefs,	doctrines	and	philosophies	are	strictly	dreamstate
phenomenon	with	no	independent	existence	in	truth.	It	should	now	be	easy	to	look
at	any	teacher	or	teaching,	at	any	book,	at	any	spiritual	or	religious	assertion,	and	to
instantly	know	its	exact	and	certain	value.	It	should	now	be	easy	to	look	at	every

=== Page 129 ===
internal	thought,	belief	and	emotion	and	know	without	the	possibility	of	error	what
is	real	and	what	is	imagined.	It	should	now	be	clear	that	there	is	no	room	for	debate
or	opinion	with	regard	to	what	is	true	and	what	is	false.	The	distinction	is	absolute:
	
Truth	exists.	Untruth	does	not.
	
	
	
	
*	*	*
	
	
	

=== Page 130 ===
Wisefool	Press
	
The	Enlightenment	Trilogy
	
By	Jed	McKenna
	
Spiritual	Enlightenment:	The	Damnedest	Thing
	
Spiritually	Incorrect	Enlightenment
	
Spiritual	Warfare
	
&
	
Jed	McKenna’s	Notebook
All	Bonus	Content	from	The	Enlightenment	Trilogy
	
These	books	are	made	available	in	a	variety	of	print,	electronic	and	audio	formats,
and	in	other	languages	from	other	publishers.	Please	visit	our	website	for	more
information:
	
www.WisefoolPress.com
	
#	#	#
	
	